Skip to content
Politics
Policy
Heard on the Hill
Podcasts
Visuals
More

CAMPAIGNS
Transcript: GOP presidential hopefuls debate in Milwaukee
Burgum, Christie, DeSantis, Haley, Hutchinson, Pence, Ramaswamy and Scott square off — without Trump
Republican presidential candidates Vivek Ramaswamy, left, and former U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley spar during the first debate of the GOP primary season, hosted by Fox News at the Fiserv Forum in Milwaukee on Wednesday.
Republican presidential candidates Vivek Ramaswamy, left, and former U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley spar during the first debate of the GOP primary season, hosted by Fox News at the Fiserv Forum in Milwaukee on Wednesday. (Win McNamee/Getty Images)
By CQ Staff
Posted August 24, 2023 at 5:11pm
Eight Republican presidential candidates answered questions from Fox News correspondents and debated each other on Aug. 23 in Milwaukee. The front-runner, former President Donald Trump, did not participate. This transcript was first published on CQ.

BRIT HUME, FOX NEWS SENIOR POLITICAL ANALYST (voice-over on videotape): Some call it the heartland. Others, flyover country. But for the 2024 presidential hopefuls, the Midwest is the place to land. Here, there is one battleground that may be harder to win than ever, Wisconsin. A state known for its beer and cheese, gridiron and grit, and also its razor thin elections.

In 2016 Republicans narrowly flipped the Badger State red for the first time since Ronald Reagan. But it was back to blue by 2020. That election came during an unprecedented year. The country was rife with tension. In the suburbs of Milwaukee, the division seemed deeper than ever. But that was just the beginning.

Two years later the US Supreme Court struck down Roe vs. Wade, leaving the legality of abortion up to the states. In Wisconsin, that meant a nearly total ban. The power of that issue drove Democrats to the polls this year. Now that new thin liberal majority on the court could have that abortion issue before it again just as the race for the White House accelerates.

Tonight, the Republican candidates will face off at the home of the Bucks and Marquette Golden Eagles, hoping to return next July to this city on the shore of Lake Michigan to accept the Republican nomination at their party’s national convention.

[end videotape]

BRET BAIER, FOX ANCHOR: Tonight, the race for the White House takes flight. Welcome to the first debate of the 2024 presidential campaign live at Fiserv Forum in Milwaukee.

MARTHA MACCALLUM, FOX ANCHOR: Eight Republican candidates have qualified and have chosen to be here on our debate stage tonight. They are here to lay out their vision for America, the battle — as they battle for the GOP nomination.

Good evening, everybody. I’m Martha MacCallum.

BAIER: And I’m Bret Baier. This is the very same stage on which the Republican choice for president will accept the party’s nomination next summer. The eight contenders are positioned by the order they sit in the polls with the highest polling candidates in the middle, standing center stage. Florida Governor Ron DeSantis.

(APPLAUSE)

MACCALLUM: Next, (inaudible) Vivek Ramaswamy.

(APPLAUSE)

BAIER: Former Vice President Mike Pence.

(APPLAUSE)

MACCALLUM: Former South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley.

(APPLAUSE)

BAIER: Former New Jersey Governor Chris Christie.

(APPLAUSE AND BOOING)

MACCALLUM: South Carolina Senator Tim Scott.

(APPLAUSE)

BAIER: Former Arkansas Governor Asa Hutchinson.

MACCALLUM: And North Dakota Governor Doug Burgum.

(APPLAUSE)

BAIER: Some ground rules for tonight. We will ask the questions and then candidates get one minute to answer. If someone is singled out, you get 30 seconds to respond. And when the time runs out, we all will hear this.

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

BAIER: Very pleasant.

MACCALLUM: So tonight, these candidates have a big opportunity to break out of the pack and to explain why they are best prepared to be the Republican choice for president at a time when the likely Democrat nominee, President Joe Biden, is working to convince the country that with Bidenomics, things are looking up.

[begin videotape]

JOE BIDEN, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES: They call my plan Bidenomics. I’m not totally sure they meant it in a totally complimentary way at the time.

(LAUGHTER)

BIDEN: But guess what? It’s working.

[end videotape]

(BOOING)

BAIER: But, is it? More than 65 percent of Americans say the country is headed in the wrong direction. And here is the reality for some voters we talked to here in Wisconsin this week.

[begin videotape]

UNKNOWN: We have noticed a dramatic increase in prices at the grocery store just across the board.

UNKNOWN: Gas is high and food is high. A lot of people out here are homeless because they can’t buy food.

UNKNOWN: It’s tough when you’ve got mortgage rates at 7-8 percent versus 2 to 3. It’s just, you can’t afford a house anymore.

UNKNOWN: Inflation is — is ridiculous. It’s killing us out here.

[end videotape]

MACCALLUM: As we sit here tonight, the number one song on the Billboard chart is called “Rich Men North of Richmond.”

(APPLAUSE)

MACCALLUM: It is by a singer from Farmville, Virginia, named Oliver Anthony. His lyrics speak of alienation, of deep frustration with the state of government and of this country. Washington, D.C., is about 100 miles north of Richmond.

(MUSIC PLAYING, “RICH MEN NORTH OF RICHMOND”)

MACCALLUM: So, Governor DeSantis, why is this song striking such a nerve in this country right now? What do you think it means?

GOV. RON DESANTIS (R-FL), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDAITE: Our country is in decline. This decline is not inevitable. It’s a choice. We need to send Joe Biden back to his basement and reverse American decline.

(APPLAUSE)

DESANTIS: And it starts with understanding we must reverse Bidenomics so that middle class families have a chance to succeed again. We cannot succeed as a country if you are working hard and can’t afford groceries, a car, or a new home while Hunter Biden can make hundreds of thousands of dollars on lousy paintings. That is wrong.

We — we also cannot succeed when the Congress spends trillions and trillions of dollars. Those “Rich Men North of Richmond” have put us in this situation.

And, finally, we need to lower your gas prices. We’re going to open up all energy production. We will be energy dominant again in this country.

(APPLAUSE)

DESANTIS: I showed it could be done in the state of Florida. I pledge to you as your president we will get the job done and I will not let you down.

(APPLAUSE)

BAIER: All right, Governor DeSantis, thank you.

Governor Christie, do you agree with Governor DeSantis just said there? And why would you be better on the economy than him?

CHRIS CHRISTIE (R), FORMER NEW JERSEY GOVERNOR, PRESIDENTIAL

CANDIDATE: Well, look, I do agree predominantly with what Governor DeSantis just laid out. I think that if you asked every one of us up here that we would agree predominantly with what he just laid out.

Here is the difference. The difference is that we’re going to have to work and make sure that we sell these ideas. And we able — be able to put ourselves in a position where we get a majority of the vote, not only by winning the Congress and the Senate in ’24, but also by having someone who has had the experience of doing it.

Now I was elected as a conservative Republican in a blue state with 61 percent of the vote, with a Democratic legislature against me the entire time. And we still, through hard, strong decision-making, brought them around to our point of view.

We cut taxes in New Jersey. We cut debt in New Jersey. We made sure that each and every time we were confronted with bad Democratic ideas we stood and stopped them. And when there were good ideas, we brought people together to make progress going forward. Truth and accountability are the things we need to do to fight waste.

And I’d say the last thing is this, Bret. We cannot sit by any longer and allow the kind of spending that is going on in Washington. Because every dollar they spend is a dollar that these people are not allowed to spend on their children and their grandchildren. It’s robbing our country and it’s wrong.

BAIER: Well, Governor, let me just follow up very quickly.

(APPLAUSE)

BAIER: New Jersey, when you were governor, had the second-lowest credit rating in the nation after Illinois, and it was downgraded 11 times.

CHRISTIE: Yes, yes. And — and that’s what happens when you inherit a blue state that has done that. But when you look at what we did on debt, Bret, in that state, we cut debt in that state, debt that had been left to us by three Democratic gubernatorial predecessors of mine who ran up that debt tremendously.

And what you also saw us to do was to cut the unemployment rate in half. It was over 10 percent when I became governor in 2010. What we also did was cut pension payments to public employees to make sure that taxpayers were not being soaked by a public employee —

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

CHRISTIE: — union system that was killing the taxpayer.

BAIER: Thank you, Governor.

MACCALLUM: Governor Scott — I mean, Tim Scott, Senator Scott, excuse me, the song also goes after welfare programs. As a senator, now President Biden argued for freezing federal spending back, this was back the ’80s, and dealing with sacred cows. He does not talk about that anymore. You have been a senator though for 10 years. So what have you done to rein in the increasing size of government?

SEN. TIM SCOTT (R-SC), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: Well, thank you for the question. Over the last several years I’ve had an opportunity to vote against spending package after spending package after spending package.

What we also need to understand is that Joe Biden’s Bidenomics has led to the loss of $10,000 of spending power for the average family. When you see 16 percent inflation, your gas is up 40 percent. Your food is up 20 percent. Your electricity is up 20 percent. We can stop that by turning the spigot off at Washington, sending the money back to the states, and allowing the decisions to be made at their own houses.

I helped write the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in 2017. We cut taxes for single moms like the one that raised me by 70 percent, for dual households by 60 percent, returning to the average family $4,000. If you don’t send it to Washington, we can’t spend it. That’s good news for the American people.

MACCALLUM: OK. But, just to follow-up, you did — during the Trump administration, you approved $4.4 trillion, $4.1 trillion, $1.7 trillion, over the course of that administration. That’s a lot of money.

SCOTT: There is no doubt that during the Trump administration we were dealing with the COVID virus. We spent more money. But, here is what happened at the end of our time in the majority. We had low unemployment. Record low unemployment is 3.5 percent for the majority of the population, 70 percent — 70-year-low for women. African Americans, Hispanics and Asians had an all-time low. But, our inflation was at two percent. Under Joe Biden, we’ve seen the exact opposite. We’ve seen inflation explode, which led to 12 Federal Reserve increases. That’s devastating homebuyers today.

BAIER: Mr. Ramaswamy, you’re listening to these answers.

MIKE PENCE (R), 2024 PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: If I may —

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: Now, hold on for a second.

(CROSSTALK)

PENCE: So, I don’t know if I get a chance to respond.

BAIER: He didn’t mention you specifically. But, we’ll be with you in a second, Mr. Vice President. Mr. Ramaswamy, listening to all of this, why should voters choose you over more experienced politicians on this stage? You’re basically a blank slate for people. You’re 38-years-old. You’ve said that you only voted in two presidential elections before this moment, this political race.

VIVEK RAMASWAMY (R), 2024 PRESDIENTIAL CANDIDATE: So, first, let me just address the question that is on everybody’s mind at home tonight. Who the heck is this skinny guy with a funny last name, and what the heck is he doing in the middle of this debate stage? I’ll tell you, I’m not a politician, Bret. You’re right about that. I’m an entrepreneur.

My parents came to this country with no money 40 years ago. I have gone on to found multibillion dollar companies. I did it while I married my wife Apoorva, raising our two sons, following our faith in God. That is the American dream. And I am genuinely worried that that American dream will not exist for our two sons and their generation unless we do something about it.

And I do think, but it’s going to take an outsider, because for a long time, we have professional politicians in the Republican Party who have been running from something. Now is our moment to start running to something, to our vision of what it means to be an American today. If you have a broken car, you don’t turn over the keys to the people who broke it again. You hand it over to a new generation to actually fix the problem. That’s why I’m in this race, and we’re just getting warmed up.

MACCALLUM: All right. So, you (inaudible) Haley. Why are you better positioned to turn around this economy that we’ve heard all of these voters talking about tonight? Then, Mr. Ramaswamy, who is a successful entrepreneur, nationally right now, he is beating you in the polls.

NIKKI HALEY (R), 2024 PRESDIENTIAL CANDIDATE: Well, I don’t care about polls. What I care about the fact is that no one is telling the American people the truth. The truth is that Biden didn’t do this to us. Our Republicans did this to us too. When they passed that $2.2 trillion COVID stimulus bill, they left us with 90 million people on Medicaid, 42 million people on food stamps.

No one has told you how to fix it. I’ll tell you how to fix it. They need to stop the spending. They need to stop the borrowing. They need to eliminate the earmarks that Republicans brought back in, and they need to make sure they understand these are taxpayer dollars. It’s not their dollars.

And while they’re all saying this, you have Ron DeSantis. You’ve got Tim Scott. You’ve got Mike Pence. They all voted to raise the debt. And Donald Trump added $8 trillion to our debt. And our kids are never going to forgive us for this. And so, at the end of the day, you look at the 2024 budget. Republicans asked for $7.4 billion in earmarks. Democrats asked for $2.8 billion. So, you tell me who are the big spenders? I think it’s time for an accountant in the White House.

BAIER: Vice President Pence, you had mentioned that 54 percent of voters say the cost of groceries is a “major problem for them”.

PENCE: Right.

BAIER: You blamed the Biden administration spending for that increase. But, as Vice President, your administration spent more than, any prior, $7.8 trillion added to the national debt, $3.5 trillion of that before COVID. So, does that mean that you’re part of the spending problem?

PENCE: Well, first of all, thanks for the question. Thanks for letting me respond, reference to our administration’s record. I’m incredibly proud of the record of the Trump-Pence administration. In four short years, we rebuilt our military. We revived our economy. We unleashed American energy. And we appointed three conservatives to the Supreme Court that gave the American people a new beginning for the right to life.

Now, Martha, you asked earlier who is the most best prepared for this job? And I must say, with all due respect to all of my friends on the stage, and even to one that’s probably looking on, I think, unquestionably, I’m the best prepared, the most tested, the most qualified and proven conservative in this race.

I was a leader in the Congress of the United States. I led Indiana where we balanced budgets and had a AAA bond rating, when I was governor. And as Vice President of the United States, we spent funding to backfill on the military cuts of the Obama administration, and then we were there in the worst pandemic in 100 years. All that being said, I was the first person in this race to say that we’ve got to deal with the long-term national debt issues. You got people on this stage that won’t even talk about issues like Social Security and Medicare.

Vivek, you recently said a President can’t do everything. Well, I got news for you, Vivek. I’ve been in the hallway. I’ve been in the West Wing. A President in the United States has to confront every crisis facing America. I will put our nation back on the path to growth and prosperity and restore fiscal responsibility, just as I did in Congress and as governor —

BAIER: Mr. Vice President —

PENCE: — and when I was Vice President.

RAMASWAMY: But —

BAIER: Hold on, Vivek.

MACCALLUM: Hold on.

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: You were named earlier. I am going to give Vivek first.

RAMASWAMY: Yes. This isn’t that complicated, guys, unlock American energy, drill, frack, burn coal and embrace nuclear, put people back to work by no longer paying them more to stay at home, reform the US Fed, stabilize the US dollar, and go to war.

The only war that I will declare as US President will be the war on the federal administrative state that is the source of those toxic regulations acting like a wet blanket on the economy. So, I’m not sure exactly understood Mike Pence’s comment. But, I’ll let you all parse that out. For me, it’s pretty simple. That’s something the US President can do with focus, and I’ll deliver on that.

PENCE: Let me explain it to you. Let me explain it to you, Vivek, if I can. I’ll go slower this time.

RAMASWAMY: You know, I sometimes struggle with the reading comprehension.

PENCE: Look, I was a House conservative leader before it was cool. I actually pushed the Deficit Reduction Act. That was the last time we actually reduced the national debt in the United States when I was the leader of House conservatives. I balanced budgets and cut taxes when I was Governor. I mean, look, Joe Biden has weakened this country at home and abroad. Now is not the time for on-the-job training. We don’t need to bring in a rookie. We don’t need to bring in people without experience. We need to bring —

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: Wait a second.

MACCALLUM: Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. In 30 seconds when you have a rebuttal. OK? And you are up Governor DeSantis.

DESANTIS: So, here is the thing. Why are we in this mess? Part of it, and a major reason is because how this federal government handed COVID-19 by locking down this economy. It was a mistake. It should have never happened. And in Florida, we led the country out of lockdown. We kept our state free and open. And I can tell you this. As your President, I will never let the deep state bureaucrats lock you down. You don’t take somebody like Fauci and coddle him. You bring Fauci in. You sit him down. And you say, Anthony, you are fired.

(CROSSTALK)

MACCALLUM: We’re going to bring in —

(CROSSTALK)

RAMASWAMY: I just want to respond to Mike for one second, because he invoked me back. Listen, now that everybody has gotten their memorized, pre-prepared slogans out of the way, we can actually have a real discussion now. The reality and the fact of the matter is —

PENCE: Is that one of yours?

RAMASWAMY: Not really, Mike, actually. We’re just going to have some fun tonight. And the reality is, you have a bunch of people, professional politicians, super PAC puppets, following slogans handed over to them by their 400-page super PACs last week. The real choice we face in this primary is this. Do you want a super PAC puppet, or do you want a patriot who speaks the truth? Do you want incremental reform, which is what you’re hearing about, or do you want revolution?

MACCALLUM: OK.

RAMASWAMY: And I stand on the side of the American Revolution rather than —

PENCE: I got to address —

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: We are going to take control back here.

MACCALLUM: We need everyone to have a moment on the economy.

PENCE: Yes.

MACCALLUM: I think that’s fair.

PENCE: Can I address the COVID issues the Governor brought up?

MACCALLUM: There are two people who have not — we’re going to get back to that. Yes. So, there are two people who we have not heard from yet. So, let’s hear from Governor Burgum and then from Governor Hutchinson on the economy, sir.

DOUG BURGUM (R), 2024 PRESDIENTIAL CANDIDATE: Well, great. Thank you, Martha.

And, of course, I’m from a town of 300 people. It’s a big deal to make it on the stage with all these folks.

But —

(CHEERS)

BURGUM: But when they were — they were all wishing me well and I think I took them a little too literally when they said go to Milwaukee and break a leg.

(LAUGHTER)

BURGUM: But I do want to say on this, we’re missing something. We can’t just talk about the Biden economy because the economy, energy and national security are all tied together.

We — of course, we’re paying too much for energy in our state right — in country right now. But part of the reason why is because the Biden policies on energy. We’ve got a plan right now, the $1.2 trillion of Green New Deal spending buried in the inflation creation act is something that is just subsidizing China.

We’re — if we’re going to stop buying oil from the Middle East and start buying batteries from China, we’re just trading OPEC for Sinopec. And then belatedly, belatedly, the Biden administration says, no, we’re going to put sanctions on Russian oil.

Well, we put sanctions on Russian oil. Well, then, it’s 20 percent off. Who’s buying it? China.

So, if you buy a battery in this country, you buy a solar panel, it’s being produced in a plant in China powered by coal where it’s being powered by oil and gas at 20 percent off. And every farmer in this county like to buy diesel at 20 percent off, just like they’re buying it in China.

BAIER: Governor Hutchinson, jump in.

(APPLAUSE)

ASA HUTCHINSON (R), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: Thank you, Bret. Delighted to be here tonight.

And let me just tell you that I’m a pro-life governor from a conservative state that have a conservative record in which I lowered taxes in Arkansas as governor. I created a $2 billion surplus that I passed over to my successor. And I made sure that we shrunk the size of government.

We have 14 percent fewer state employees in Arkansas after I left the government than when I took over as governor eight years ago. I tell that because that’s what we need in Washington, D.C. We need somebody who can actually constrain the growth of federal government, that can actually reduce the size.

And I pledge to reduce it by 10 percent our federal nondefense workforce. That’s a specific pledge to make that attacks the administrative state. And let me applaud some of the business partners that are here that have had success in business.

But let me tell you, I’ve been a federal prosecutor. I’ve served our country in terms of being head of the DEA and Homeland Security in times of crisis. And while I think that that’s experience that is important for the future of our country to be the president of the United States that can lead with positive solutions to be held accountable.

BAIER: Thank you.

We have a lot of topics to get to and I promise we’re going to get to everyone if we play within the rules.

Okay, next topic. More than a thousand people are still unaccounted for in Maui after the deadliest US wildfire in more than a century. Hawaii’s governor and White House officials said that climate change amplified the cost of human error.

MACCALLUM: And a tropical storm hit California for the first time in 84 years. The ocean hit 101 degrees off the coast of Florida. And in the last month, the heat wave in the Southwest broke records nearly 50 years old.

BAIER: So, Alexander Diaz from Young America’s Foundation has a question for you all.

[begin videotape]

ALEXANDER DIAZ, CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY OF AMERICA: Polls consistently show that young people’s number one issue is climate change. How would you as both president of the United States and leader of the Republican Party calm their fears that the Republican Party doesn’t care about climate change?

[end videotape]

MACCALLUM: So, we want to start on this with a show of hands. Do you believe in human behavior is causing climate change? Raise your hand if you do.

DESANTIS: Look, we’re not schoolchildren. Let’s have the debate. I mean, I’m happy to take it to start. Alexander —

BAIER: So do you want to raise your hand —

(CHEERS)

DESANTIS: I don’t think that’s the way to do it.

So, let me just say to Alexander this — first of all, one of the reasons our country has declined is because of the way the corporate media treats Republicans versus Democrats. Biden was on the beach while those people were suffering. He was asked about it and he said no comment. Are you kidding me?

As somebody that’s handled disasters in Florida, you’ve got to be activated. You’ve got to be there. You’ve got to be present. You’ve got to be helping people who are doing this.

RAMASWAMY: Can we start for us (ph) to answer the question?

(CROSSTALK)

DESANTIS: And here’s the deal.

MACCALLUM: Yeah.

RAMASWAMY: Let’s just answer the question.

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: Is that a yes? Is that a yes? Is that a hand raise?

MACCALLUM: You do not —

RAMASWAMY: I think it was a hand raise for him. And it’s — my hands are in my pockets because —

(CROSSTALK)

DESANTIS: No, I didn’t — I didn’t raise my hand.

RAMASWAMY: Let us be honest as Republicans. I’m the only person on the stage who isn’t bought and paid for, so I can say this — the climate change agenda is a hoax.

BAIER: Oh, whoa, whoa, whoa.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: That is ridiculous.

(BOOS)

RAMASWAMY: The climate change agenda is a hoax. And we have (INAUDIBLE) independent school.

And the reality is the anti-carbon agenda is the wet blanket on our economy. And so, the reality is more people are dying of bad climate change policies than they are of actual climate change.

BAIER: Governor — Governor Haley, are you bought and paid for?

(CROSSTALK)

RAMASWAMY: The temperature (ph) is down by 98 percent.

BAIER: Listen, hold on. Hold on. Listen, listen, listen —

(CROSSTALK)

CHRIS CHRISTIE (R), PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE: Look, I’ve had it. No, no —

BAIER: Wait, hold on, hold on.

CHRISTIE: I’ve had enough — I’ve had enough already tonight of a guy who sounds like ChatGPT standing up here.

(LAUGHTER)

CHRISTIE: And the last person in one of these debates, Bret, who stood in the middle of the stage and said, “what’s a skinny guy with an odd last name doing up here” was Barack Obama. And I’m afraid we’re dealing with the same type of amateur standing on the stage tonight.

RAMASWAMY: Give me a hug — give me a hug just like you did to Obama.

CHRISTIE: The same type of amateur.

RAMASWAMY: And you will help elect me just like you did Obama, too. Give me that big (ph) hug, brother.

CHRISTIE: The same type of amateur.

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: Hold on, hold on.

Governor Haley, would you like to respond? Are you bought and paid for?

HALEY: So, Bret, what I would like to say is the fact that I think this is exactly why Margaret Thatcher said, if you want something said, ask a man. If you want something done, ask a woman.

(CHEERS)

HALEY: First of all, we do care about clean air, clean water. We want to see that taken care of. But there’s a right way to do it.

And the right way is first of all, yes, is climate change real? Yes, it is. But if you go want to go and really change the environment, then we need to start telling China and India that they have to lower their emissions.

(APPLAUSE)

HALEY: That’s where our problem is. And these green subsidies that Biden has put in, all he’s done is help China because he doesn’t understand all these electric vehicles that he’s done, what that does that, half of the batteries for electric vehicles are made in China. And so, that’s not helping the environment. You’re putting money in China’s pocket. And Biden did that.

So, first of all, I think we need to acknowledge the truth, which is these subsidies are not working. We also need to take on the international world and say, okay, India and China, you’ve got to stop polluting. And that’s when we’ll start to deal with the planet — the planet (ph).

BAIER: Senator Scott, are you bought and paid for?

SCOTT: Absolutely.

BAIER: Are you bought and paid for?

SCOTT: I’m sorry?

BAIER: Are you bought and paid for?

SCOTT: Absolutely not.

I mean, here’s what the American people deserve. It’s a debate about the issues that affect their lives. Going back and forth and being childish is not helpful to the American people to decide on the next leader of our country.

(CHEERS)

SCOTT: Number one. Wait a second.

Number two, as a kid who grew up with a single parent household mired in poverty, I wondered was the American dream real for kids who are devastated by poverty, devastated by the challenges of life?

I came to the conclusion that America can do for anyone what she’s done for me if we focus on restoring hope, creating opportunities and protecting America.

If we want the environment to be better and we all do, the best thing to do is to bring our jobs home from China. If we create 10 million new jobs in my Made in America Plan, we will have a better economy and a better environment.

Let me tell you why I say that, Bret.

America —

BAIER: Do it quickly.

SCOTT: America has cut — I’m a Southern boy. I talk slow.

So, America —

MACCALLUM: There’s another one.

SCOTT: That was quick.

America has cut our carbon footprint in half in the last 25 years. The places where they are continuing to increase — Africa, 950 million people; India, over a billion; China, over a billion.

Why do we put ourselves at a disadvantage, devastating our own economy? Let’s bring our jobs home.

BAIER: We have a lot of different topics to get to.

MACCALLUM: Yeah. We do. We thank you all. Thank you, Senator Scott.

So, coming up next, the candidates will weigh in on what could be a defining issue in the 2024 campaign.

The first Republican debate continues, moments away.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

MACCALLUM: Abortion has been a losing issue for Republicans since the Dobbs decision. In six state referendums, all have upheld abortion rights in this country. And even in red states, there are more swing state referendums that are coming up as we head into the elections, as well on this.

So, Governor Haley, what do you say to your party and to your state, which today confirmed a six-week abortion law as well, especially the impact on women suburban voters across this country?

HALEY: Thank you, Martha. I am unapologetically pro-life, not because the Republican Party tells me to be, but because my husband was adopted, and I had trouble having both of my children. So I’m surrounded by blessings.

Having said that, we need to stop demonizing this issue. This is talking about the fact that unelected justices didn’t need to decide something this personal, because it’s personal for every woman and man. Now, it’s been put in the hands of the people. That’s great.

When it comes to a federal ban, let’s be honest with the American people and say it will take 60 Senate votes. It will take a majority of the House. So in order to do that, let’s find consensus. Can’t we all agree that we should ban late term abortions? Can’t we all agree that we should encourage adoptions?

Can’t we all agree that doctors and nurses who don’t believe in abortion shouldn’t have to perform them? Can’t we all agree that contraception should be available? And can’t we all agree that we are not going to put a woman in jail or give her the death penalty if she gets an abortion?

Let’s treat this like the — like a respectful issue that it is and humanize the situation and stop demonizing the situation.

PENCE: Bret.

BAIER: Hold on. You’re not mentioned, Vice President Pence.

Governor DeSantis, you signed a six-week abortion ban in Florida. One of your biggest financial backers said that you need to, quote, “shift to get moderates or you will lose.” What do you say to him and others who say, politically, that is a tough thing to sell nationally?

DESANTIS: Well, I would say we sold the biggest election landslide victory in the history of the Republican Party in the state of Florida in 2022. That’s what I did. We can win.

But second of all, look, you got to do what you think is right. I believe in a culture of life. I was proud to sign the Heartbeat Bill. I remember the most impactful moments of my life was when I heard the heartbeat of my oldest daughter in my wife’s womb, and then saw the sonograms of all three of my kids.

What the Democrats are trying to do on this issue is wrong, to allow abortion all the way up to the moment of birth. I know a lady in Florida named Penny, she survived multiple abortion attempts. She was left discarded in a pan. Fortunately, her grandmother saved her and brought her to a different hospital.

We’re better than what the Democrats are selling. We are not going to allow abortion all the way up till birth, and we will hold them accountable for their extremism.

BAIER: But just to be clear, Governor, would you sign a six-week ban federally?

DESANTIS: I’m going to stand on the side of life. Look, I understand, Wisconsin is going to do it different than Texas. I understand Iowa and New Hampshire are going to do different. But I will support the cause of life as governor and as president.

BAIER: Vice President Pence, you’re shaking your head.

BAIER: Hold on, hold on, hold on, Senator. Vice President Pence, you’re shaking your head.

PENCE: Well, look, I’m not new to this cause. After I gave my life to Jesus Christ as my Lord and Savior, I open up the book and I read, before I formed you in the womb, I knew you. And see I set before you life and death, blessings and curses now choose life.

And I knew from that moment on the cause of life had to be my cause. And I’ve been a champion for life in the Congress, a champion for life as governor, and as vice president.

And to be honest with you, Nikki, you’re my friend. But consensus is the opposite of leadership. When the Supreme Court returned this question to the American people, they didn’t just send it to the states only. It’s not a state’s only issue. It’s a moral issue.

And I promise you, as President of the United States, the American people will have a champion for life in the Oval Office. Can’t we have a minimum standard in every state in the nation that says when a baby is capable of feeling pain, an abortion cannot be allowed?

A 15-week ban is an idea whose time has come. It’s supported by 70 percent of the American people. But it’s going to take unapologetic leadership, leadership that stands on principle and express compassion for women —

HALEY: I want to —

MACCALLUM: OK. Hold on.

PENCE: — and crisis, pregnancies, I’ll do that as President of the United States.

HALEY: He called my name, so I want to respond to that.

MACCALLUM: Thirty seconds.

HALEY: So first of all, I will say it is in the hands of the people, and that’s where it should be. But when you’re talking about a federal ban, be honest with the American people.

PENCE: I am being honest.

HALEY: We have had 45 pro-life senators in over 100 years. So no Republican president can ban abortions, any more than a Democrat president could ban all those state laws. Don’t make women feel like they have to decide on this issue, when you know we don’t have 60 Senate votes in the House.

PENCE: Seventy-percent of the American people support legislation to ban abortion —

HALEY: But 70 percent of the Senate does not.

PENCE: — after a baby is capable experiencing pain. It’s called leadership.

MACCALLUM: Hold on. I’m going to (inaudible)

HALEY: Seventy percent of the Senate does not. You have to be honest with the American people.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: We have to have a 15-week limit.

MACCALLUM: All right. Let’s get Governor Burgum in for one minute here. So — but the Supreme Court did overturn Roe v. Wade, and the result of that decision was that it went back to the States. So that’s where it is right now.

So as I understand it, you are not in favor of a federal ban. What do you say about the states? There’s about five of them, including New Jersey, I think a few others, that allow abortion up until the time of birth.

Now, if you were president, would you be able to abide that?

BURGUM: Well, first of all, I’m a pro-life governor of a very pro-life state. And this issue is, of course, very important. But I am on the record and I stand behind that we should not have a federal abortion ban. We should not.

And the reason why we shouldn’t is very simple, it’s the 10th Amendment in the Constitution. In the Constitution, which the states created the federal government, not the other way around, it says that there were certain duties allowed to the federal government delegated to them by the states. The rest are left to the states comma, or importantly or to the people.

We need to get back to freedom and liberty for the people in this country. And we can have — we can have Republicans who fight for 50 years for this great cause and we return it back to the states. And then the next day, they turn around and go, no, the Fed should do that. Because the Feds are stepping into people’s lives. They’re stepping into people’s businesses over and over.

If we say that the Fed should be in on this one, where do we stop? I say that we follow the Constitution and this is returned to the states. This is where it should be.

BAIER: But, Governor Burgum, you signed a six-week ban…

(APPLAUSE)

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: Time out. You signed a six-week ban. Governor Burgum, you signed a six-week ban. So you’re saying federally it’s all going to go to the states?

BURGUM: Yes. And what — what is going to work in New York will never work in North Dakota…

BAIER: OK.

BURGUM: … and vice-versa. That’s why…

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: Governor…

(CROSSTALK)

BURGUM: … 50 states.

HUTCHINSON: This — this is too important of an issue that I have to address. First of all, the Supreme Court gave it back to the elected representatives, whether it’s the state’s or whether it’s the United States Congress.

BAIER: That’s right.

HUTCHINSON: So there is authority. And that’s why President Biden is pushing for a Democrat proposal which is, in essence, abortion-on-demand through the term. So they have their extreme position at a national level. We — it’s most likely going to be addressed in the states, but it’s certainly fine to be addressed at the national level as well.

Arkansas has the record of being the most pro-life state in the nation. I’ve signed 30 pro-life pieces of legislation while I was governor. And every state can determine a different outcome here. And it is the most important issue for women and for the unborn child and for our country that we get this right. It’s going to be a continued debate.

Let’s talk about it in terms of compassion, in terms of protecting the life and also understanding how we have to enhance abortion — excuse me, adoption services. How we have to enhance maternal care. Those things we’ve done in Arkansas and are important for our nation’s future.

BAIER: There are a lot of issues that are very important.

SCOTT: Bret…

BAIER: Senator, I’ll let you…

SCOTT: Thank you.

BAIER: … weigh in.

SCOTT: We cannot let states like California, New York, and Illinois have abortions on-demand up until the day of birth. That is immoral. It is unethical. It is wrong.

(APPLAUSE)

SCOTT: We must have a president of the United States who will advocate and fight for at the minimum a 15-week limit. I am 100 percent pro-life conservative. I have 100 percent pro-life record. I’ve got to tell you, though, we must fight for life.

Our Declaration of Independence says our creator gave us inalienable rights that include life. That is (inaudible) — that is an issue we must solve. We can’t leave it to Illinois. We can’t leave it to Minnesota. We can’t leave it to Illinois. We must solve that issue…

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

SCOTT: … with a 15-week limit at a minimum.

BAIER: Thank you, Senator.

HALEY: Bret, I think we’re all pro-life.

BAIER: Thank you.

HALEY: But what I would love is for someone to ask Biden and Kamala Harris, are they for 38 weeks or are they for 39 weeks, are they for 40 weeks? Because that’s what the media needs to be asking.

BAIER: All right. Another issue is America and the crime crisis, the homelessness crisis. American cities are in decline. People are moving out as homelessness, drugs, crime move in. There are problems accelerated — they did accelerate during the pandemic and are still rising, actually.

MACCALLUM: Murders in Los Angeles, New York, Chicago, all up 30 percent between 2019 and 2022. Homelessness is up 11 percent, the largest jump in recorded history.

Vice President Pence, a lot of this began in the COVID era. How much of what we are seeing happening around this country is a result of those COVID lockdowns? And is your administration in part to blame for how we got here?

PENCE: Well, I think what’s in part to blame is the Democrats been talking about defunding the police for the last five years. And we ought to be funding law enforcement, particularly in our major cities at — at unprecedented levels. I mean, it’s extraordinary to think about the violence that’s claiming innocent lives literally every week in every major city in this country.

And yet Democrats and liberal prosecutors in major metropolitan areas continue to — to work out their fanciful agendas, to — to do bail reform and — and go easy. What we need is — is strong commitment to law enforcement. We need leadership in Washington, D.C., that will marshal the resources of the states, marshal the resources of the American people.

But let me also say it’s about opportunity. I mean, a lot of people don’t know that those Trump-Pence tax cuts that we got signed into law go away at the end of 2025 if we don’t have a Republican president and a Republican House and a Republican Senate.

But when I’m president of the United States, we’re actually going to cut taxes further. We’re going to extend those tax cuts. And we’re going to close the federal Department of Education, block grant all that…

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

PENCE: … funding back to the states with a growing economy and educational choice and law enforcement. We will bring our cities back.

BAIER: Governor Christie, another issue. This weekend here in Milwaukee reports say there were 30 shootings. And a number of them including kids. Add that to the big increase in school shootings around the country.

BAIER: Democrats blame this crisis on easy access to guns. They also blame Republicans for blocking gun control legislation. What would President Christie do?

CHRISTIE: You know, I’m proud of the fact, Bret, that I’m the only person along with Governor Hutchinson up on this stage who has actually run a United States Attorney’s Office. I ran the fifth largest office in America, in a — in a state where there is significant urban crime. And the problem is not going to be solved by more money. The problem is that these prosecutors in these localities, in the states, are refusing to do their job, and to arrest violent criminals.

So, what a President Christie would do is appoint an Attorney General who would instruct each of the 93 US attorneys that they are to take over the prosecution of violent crime in every one of those cities that are failing to do so. We have plenty of room in the federal prisons to lock up these violent criminals and clean up what’s going on all across this country in these individual cities.

Secondly, what we need to make sure that each and every one of these criminals understand is that the laws apply to everybody, and when Hunter Biden fills out a fake application, a false application, for a gun permit, and then is facing a 10-year mandatory minimum, which was mandated by legislation sponsored by his father, and then you have a Justice Department that walks away from those charges. We’re telling people that the law doesn’t apply to everybody. In a Christie administration, he would go to jail for 10 years.

BAIER: What about a President Ramaswamy? What does a President Ramaswamy do about guns?

RAMASWAMY: So, the reality is, we have a crime wave in this country, and we know how to fix it. The question is, do we actually have the spine to do it? More cops in the streets, who are on the streets able to do their jobs without looking over their shoulder for getting sued. And we also have a mental health epidemic in this country. Just over the same period that we have closed mental health institutions, we have seen a spike in violent crime. Do we have the spine to bring them back? I think we should. As President, I will.

But, it’s not just drugging up people in those psychiatric institutions with Zoloft and Seroquel. It’s a deeper issue. I think faith-based approaches can play a role here, too. We’re in the middle of a national identity crisis. And I say this as a member of my generation. The problem in our country right now, the reason we have that mental health epidemic is that people are so hungry for purpose and meaning, at a time when family, faith, patriotism, hard work have all disappeared. What we really need is a tonal reset from the top saying that this is what it means to be an American.

Yes, we will stand for the rule of law. Yes, we will close the southern border where criminals are coming in every day. And yes, we will back law enforcement, because we remember who we really are. And that’s also how we address that mental health epidemic in the next generation that is directly leading to violent crime.

PENCE: Can I speak —

BAIER: Governor DeSantis, really quickly, Governor DeSantis.

PENCE: We don’t have an identity crisis, Vivek. We’re not looking for a new national identity. The American people are the most faith filled, freedom loving, idealistic, hard-working people the world has ever known. We just need government as good as our people.

RAMASWAMY: Mike, I think the difference is, you might have — some others like you may have on the stage, it is Morning in America speech. It is not Morning in America. We live in a dark moment, and we have to confront the fact that we’re in an internal sort of cold cultural civil war and we have to recognize that —

(CROSSTALK)

PENCE: You are (inaudible) the American people with a failed government in Washington, D.C. We just need government as good as our people again.

RAMASWAMY: So —

BAIER: Governor DeSantis — Governor DeSantis, I want you to weigh in here.

RAMASWAMY: Let me just finish addressing that slogan, because I don’t know what that slogan means. We need to shut down the administrative state, and that’s actually how we translate.

BAIER: Governor DeSantis, I want you to weigh in here.

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: I want you to weigh in, Governor DeSantis. Crime has been on the rise Florida, Governor DeSantis. How do you stop crime?

DESANTIS: Well, actually, crime is at a 50-year-low in Florida.

BAIER: Not in Miami.

DESANTIS: We’re happy with that. Well, the statewide, it’s a 50-year-low. And so, here is the thing. These hollowed out cities, this is a symptom of America’s decline. And one of the biggest reasons is because you have George Soros funding these radical left-wing district attorneys. They get into office and they say they’re not going to prosecute crimes.

BAIER: Yes.

DESANTIS: They disagree with — the inmates start running the asylum. There is one guy in this entire country that’s ever done anything about that, me. When we had two of these district attorneys in Florida elected with Soros funding who said they wouldn’t do their job, I removed them from their posts.

They are gone. And as President, we’re going to go after all of these people because they are hurting the quality of life, and they are victimizing innocent people in every corner of this country, and it will stop when I get into office.

MACCALLUM: OK. One word here before the break — Governor Burgum?

BURGUM: Bret and Martha, I just thought it’s interesting, you asked your question about the problems we’re having in big cities. No one ever asked the question of, what — what about the crime wave in small towns?

Because in a small town, neighbors help neighbors. People understand each other. If a farmer gets sick, everybody comes together and helps him get the crop up. There’s accountability. There’s transparency.

One thing I think this country could use is somebody in the White House that understands small town values because that’s our road back to get this country on track again.

(CHEERS)

BAIER: Governor Hutchinson?

HUTCHINSON: As former head of the DEA, I understand the drug crisis in America.

And right now, whenever you look at the challenges in our inner — inner-city, there’s three simple words that would be helpful. One, enforce the law when it comes to crime. Secondly, let’s deal with the challenge of fentanyl. And it’s both about stopping the fentanyl coming from Mexico, but it’s also about education of our young people, making sure that we have the tools that are needed for addiction counseling. That’s what we expanded in Arkansas as well.

Whenever you look at the underlying challenge of America, though, no one likes to see an America with smash-and-grab in our inner — inner cities. As president of the United States, that will stop. It starts at the top with respect for our justice system, that a former president who’s under indictment has undermined by attacking judges, by attacking prosecutors, by attacking the system and saying he’s aggrieved.

And so, we have to have respect for our justice system and the rule of law. And it starts at the top with the president of the United States.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Bret — Bret, hold on.

BAIER: Thank you.

MACCALLUM: We need to take a break.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Bret —

MACCALLUM: So, speaking of that, right now, you are looking live at Fulton County jail where former President Donald Trump will be processed tomorrow. So, next, the candidates will have an opportunity to talk about the coming trials of Donald Trump.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

BAIER: We have a lot to get to in this second hour of this GOP primary debate policy discussions the Americans want to hear you all on, China, Ukraine, immigration, education. But we are going to take a brief moment and talk about the elephant not in the room.

MACCALLUM: Former President Trump has been indicted in four different states on 91 counts. He will be processed tomorrow in Georgia at the Fulton County Jail for charges relating to the 2020 election loss.

BAIER: You all signed a pledge to support the eventual Republican nominee. If former president Trump is convicted in a court of law, would you still support him as your party’s choice? Please raise your hand if you would.

(CHEERS)

BAIER: Just — hold on. So just to be clear, Governor Christie, you were kind of late to the game there, but you raised your hand?

CHRISTIE: No, no. I’m doing this. Look. Look, I’m doing this.

BAIER: And I know you didn’t.

CHRISTIE: Here’s the — here’s the bottom line. Someone’s got to stop normalizing this conduct. OK? Now — and now, whether or not — whether or not you believe that the criminal charges are right or wrong, the conduct is beneath the office of President of the United States.

(CHEERS)

And, you know, this is the great thing about this country. Booing is allowed, but it doesn’t change the truth. It doesn’t change the truth.

(BOOING)

BAIER: Mr. Ramaswamy, you raised your hands supporting.

RAMASWAMY: I’d like to get in and respond. Let’s just speak the truth. OK? President Trump, I believe was the best president of the 21st century.

It’s — and Chris Christie, honest to God, your claim that Donald Trump is motivated by vengeance and grievance would be a lot more credible if your entire campaign were not based on vengeance and grievance against one man.

And if people at home want to see a bunch of people blindly bashing Donald Trump without an iota of vision for this country, they could just change the channel to MSNBC right now. But I’m not running for president of MSNBC. I am running for President of the United States.

We’re skating on thin ice and we cannot set a precedent where the party in power uses police force to indict its political opponents. It is wrong. We have to end the weaponization of justice in this country.

BAIER: Thirty seconds, Governor DeSantis.

CHRISTIE: Well, you know, let me tell you something.

BAIER: And I’m sorry, 30 seconds, Governor Christie.

CHRISTIE: You make me laugh because —

RAMASWAMY: (inaudible) always, brother.

CHRISTIE: — you sit — you sit — you sit here in an answer — you sit here in an answer right —

(CROWD BOOING)

BAIER: Hold on one second.

(CROWD BOOING)

CHRISTIE: You sit here in an answer right…

(BOOING)

BAIER: Hold on a second.

(BOOING)

(APPLAUSE)

CHRISTIE: You sit here in an answer…

MACCALLUM: Go ahead, Governor Christie.

BAIER: Hold on. Hold on, Governor Christie.

MACCALLUM: Hold on.

BAIER: Well, so, listen, the more time we spend doing this, the less time they can talk about issues you want to talk about.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

BAIER: So let’s just get through this section.

Governor Christie.

CHRISTIE: You — you sit here talking about how you want to stand up for the rule of law…

RAMASWAMY: Yes.

CHRISTIE: … and law and order.

And the fact is that it can’t be selective. In your book, you had much different things to say about Donald Trump than you’re saying here tonight.

RAMASWAMY: That’s not true.

CHRISTIE: Oh, it is very true.

RAMASWAMY: That is not true.

CHRISTIE: It’s very true. I read it. And I know…

RAMASWAMY: Because there’s a difference between bad behavior and illegal behavior, Chris.

CHRISTIE: Look, I — no, no. By the way, by the way…

RAMASWAMY: And you, as a prosecutor, should know better.

CHRISTIE: Yes, yes, I — you know what? I know a lot better.

RAMASWAMY: There’s a difference between that and behavior. And…

CHRISTIE: I know…

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

CHRISTIE: I know a lot better than you do.

You have never done it, like you have never done anything to try to advance the interests of this government, except to put yourself forward as a candidate tonight.

And here’s the thing.

(BOOING)

CHRISTIE: We have stood up for law and order. I did it as US attorney. I did it as governor. And I am not going to bow to anyone when we have a president of the United States who disrespects the Constitution.

He said — he said…

RAMASWAMY: You can get your MSNBC contributor…

(CROSSTALK)

CHRISTIE: He said — he said…

MACCALLUM: OK, hold on.

RAMASWAMY: The fact is, these are politicized indictments.

CHRISTIE: Martha…

RAMASWAMY: And we have to call out the truth.

MACCALLUM: Gentlemen…

CHRISTIE: Martha, it’s important to say that the president said, Donald Trump said, it’s OK to suspend the Constitution.

Now, the oath you take is to preserve, protect, and defend, not suspend. I will always stand up for our Constitution, regardless of the political pressure.

MACCALLUM: All right, we have another question for you.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

MACCALLUM: We’re going to get everyone in on this issue, but I have another question. I have another question.

(CROSSTALK)

(APPLAUSE)

MACCALLUM: Hold on. You will.

All right, so, President Trump’s former vice president is on this stage tonight. He has faced hecklers on the campaign trail over his actions on January the 6th. On that day, the vice president moved forward with the certification of the election.

So, do you believe that Mike Pence did the right thing?

Senator Scott, do you believe he did the right thing?

SCOTT: Absolutely, he did the right thing, number one.

Number two…

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

PENCE: Thank you, sir.

SCOTT: We should be — we should be asking ourselves a bigger question about the weaponization of the Department of Justice.

When I’m president, the first thing I will do is fire Merrick Garland.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

SCOTT: Second thing I will do, fire Christopher Wray, because we need Lady Justice to wear a blindfold.

Without that, no one has confidence in our justice system. Seventeen percent of Republicans have confidence in our Department of Justice. Here’s why. We keep seeing not only the weaponization of the Department of Justice against political opponents, but also against parents who show up at school board meetings.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

SCOTT: They’re called — under this DOJ, they’re called domestic terrorists.

RAMASWAMY: Firing Christopher Wray is not going to…

(CROSSTALK)

SCOTT: But…

(CROSSTALK)

RAMASWAMY: You have to shut down the FBI, actually have the courage to get it right.

BAIER: Mr. Ramaswamy, hold on.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

SCOTT: Let me finish my comments.

MACCALLUM: Yes.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

SCOTT: Not only that.

In addition to that, we see the SWAT team show up at pro-life activists’ homes with guns drawn because this DOJ uses their power, uses their authority, not just against political opponents, but against conservatives and conservative causes.

It is time for a change in America. And I will bring that change to the greatest nation God’s green earth.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

HUTCHINSON: Martha — Martha, we have an important question still to answer.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

MACCALLUM: But, Governor DeSantis, do you believe that Mike Pence did the right thing on January 6?

DESANTIS: So, here’s what we need to do. We need to end the weaponization of these federal agents.

MACCALLUM: But that’s not the question.

BAIER: Right, but you — that’s not the question.

DESANTIS: Here — I know, but here’s the thing.

PENCE: Are you going to answer the question?

DESANTIS: This election is not about January 6 of 2021. It’s about January 20 of 2025, when the next president is going to take office.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

DESANTIS: I know what the Democrats would like to do. They want to talk about all these other issues, but we have got to focus on your future. We have got to focus on reversing the decline of our country.

PENCE: Right. Right.

DESANTIS: I learned in the military — I was assigned with US Navy SEALs in Iraq — that you focus on the mission above all else.

(APPLAUSE)

DESANTIS: You can’t get distracted.

So, Republicans, we have got to look forward, and we have got to make sure that we’re bringing the message that can win in November of 2024.

(CROSSTALK)

MACCALLUM: That’s fine. Did not answer the question.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

MACCALLUM: Did not answer the question.

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: Vice President Pence, what do you — what do you think, Vice President…

(CROSSTALK)

PENCE: … of the president of the United States is to support and defend the Constitution of the United States.

I think — I think the American people deserve to know whether everyone on this stage agrees that I kept my oath to the Constitution that day.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

PENCE: There’s no more important duty, right?

DESANTIS: We have answered this so many times, is the thing.

PENCE: So, answer the question.

DESANTIS: I — I have answered this before.

PENCE: So, yes.

DESANTIS: Why are — he — Mike — Mike did his duty. I got no beef with him. But here’s the thing.

(LAUGHTER)

DESANTIS: Is this what we’re going to be focusing on…

PENCE: I’m relieved.

(CROSSTALK)

DESANTIS: … going forward, the rehashing of this?

MACCALLUM: No.

(CROSSTALK)

DESANTIS: I will tell you…

BAIER: Governor DeSantis, we spent…

(CROSSTALK)

DESANTIS: … the Democrats would love that.

BAIER: Governor DeSantis…

(CROSSTALK)

DESANTIS: And they will win if we let them get away with it.

(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)

DESANTIS: I’m not letting Biden hang out in the basement this time. We’re going to run him ragged around this country, and we’re going to hold him accountable.

BAIER: Let me just say to Governor DeSantis, we spend an hour talking about policy, former President Trump is beating you by 30, 40 points in many polls. So, it is a factor in the GOP primaries.

Gov. Hutchinson, you did not raise your hand.

HUTCHINSON: I did not raise my hand because there’s an important issue we as a party have to face. And well over a year ago, I said that Donald Trump was morally disqualified from being President, again, as a result of what happened on January 6th. More people are understanding the importance of that, including conservative legal scholars, who says he may be disqualified under the 14th Amendment from being President, again, as a result of the insurrection. This is something that could disqualify him, under our rules, and under the Constitution.

And so obviously, I’m not going to support somebody who’s been convicted of a serious felony, or who has this is disqualified under our Constitution. And that’s consistent with RNC rules. And I hope everybody would agree with that.

(CROSSTALK)

CHRISTIE: Martha, can I answer the question?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Can I get in?

CHRISTIE: OK, I’d like to answer.

(CROSSTALK)

MACCALLUM: Vice President Pence.

CHRISTIE: All right, I’d like to answer the question you asked and not give a pre canned speech. Mike Pence stood for the Constitution. And he deserves not grudging credit. He deserves our thanks as Americans for putting his oath of office and the Constitution of the United States before personal political and unfair pressure.

And the argument that we need to have in this party, before we can move on to the issues that Ron talked about, is we have to dispense with the person who said that we need to suspend the Constitution to put forward his political career. Mike Pence said no, and he deserves credit for it. OK.

MACCALLUM: OK. Gov. Haley, we haven’t heard from you on this. Do you agree — do you agree that Vice President Pence did this — did the right thing that day or not?

HALEY: I do think that Vice President Pence did the right thing. And I do think that we need to give him credit for that. But what I will also tell you is, look, I mean, when it comes to whether President Trump should serve or not, I trust the American people let them vote, let them decide. But what they will tell you is that it is time for a new generational conservative leader. We have to look at the fact that three quarters of Americans don’t want a rematch between Trump and Biden. And we have to face the fact that Trump is the most disliked politician in America. We can’t win a general election that way.

MACCALLUM: Gov. Burgum?

BAIER: Gov. Burgum?

MACCALLUM: It’s Gov. Burgum opportunity.

BURGUM: Happy to answer the question. Mike Pence did the right thing on January 6th, but I wouldn’t say you started off the top of this hour saying we’re going to talk about China, Ukraine, education.

BAIER: We are.

BURGUM: China is the number one threat to our country. And every minute that these eight candidates spend talking about the past instead about the future is time that is just — the — you know, who loves it, Biden loves it. But China loves it when we’re talking about the past.

MACCALLUM: OK. As promised, we were going to spend a few questions on it. Let people say what they wanted to say. And now indeed, we are moving on to the subject (INAUDIBLE)

BAIER: The US has committed nearly $0.70 —

PENCE: Can I speak on this issue. I was kind of (INAUDIBLE) —

MACCALLUM: You did — you can answer on this.

BAIER: You didn’t.

MACCALLUM: You didn’t answer.

BAIER: You didn’t say something?

PENCE: Yes, no.

BAIER: I thought — we thought you were done. But you —

PENCE: No (INAUDIBLE).

BAIER: — please.

RAMASWAMY: Well, Mike, why don’t you say this? Join me in making a commitment —

MACCALLUM: Hold on.

RAMASWAMY: — to that on day one, you would pardon Donald Trump. I’m the only candidate on this stage when the (INAUDIBLE) say it.

(CROSSTALK)

RAMASWAMY: That is how we move our nation forward.

(CROSSTALK)

PENCE: (INAUDIBLE) Donald Trump will be convicted of these crimes.

RAMASWAMY: You can — make be able to make a commitment the same justice system that was this corrupt.

PENCE: (INAUDIBLE) difference between you and me.

(CROSSTALK)

RAMASWAMY: Now, to answer your question.

PENCE: I’ve actually given pardons when I was governor state of Indiana. It usually follows a finding of guilt and contrition by the individual that’s been convicted. So, we’ll work (ph). If I’m president in the United States, we’ll get fair consideration of any pardon request.

But if I may, if I may. You know, it’s not about looking back at January 2021. It’s about January 20, 2017. I put my left hand on Ronald Reagan’s Bible, I raised my right hand. And I took an oath to support and defend the Constitution of the United States. And it ended with a prayer, so help me God. It was a promise that I made to the American people. But I also made it, it made it to my heavenly Father.

Every day for four years, I sought to keep that oath. And everyone on this stage needs to make it clear whether or not they’ll do the same if they are in this job and the confidence of the American people.

Now, look, I’ve made it clear, I had hoped that the issues surrounding the 2020 election and the controversies around January 6, had not come to this, had not come to criminal proceedings. I would rather they have been resolved by the American people, and the American people alone.

But no one’s above the law. And President Trump is entitled to the presumption of innocence that every American is entitled to. And we will make sure and extend that to him, that the American people deserve to know that the President asked me in his request that I reject or return votes unilaterally, power that no Vice President in American history had ever exercised or taken. He asked me to put him over the Constitution. And I chose the Constitution. And I always will. I had no right —

BAIER: Vice President Pence?

PENCE: — to overturn the election, and Kamala Harris will have no right to overturn the election when we beat them in 2024.

BAIER: Thank you, Vice President Pence.

Now, we are moving on to other issues. The US has committed nearly $77 billion in aid to the Ukraine war. The administration is now asking Congress for $24 billion more, regardless of that the specific — specifics of that plan, is there anyone on stage who would not support the increase of more funding to Ukraine?

(CROSSTALK)

DESANTIS: We would need —

RAMASWAMY: I would not support it.

DESANTIS: Europe needs to step up. I mean, I would have Europe step up and do their job.

BAIER: Mr. Ramaswamy, you’re — but you’re saying you would not too, Governor DeSantis?

DESANTIS: I will have Europe pull their weight.

BAIER: But you would —

DESANTIS: Right now they’re not doing that.

(CROSSTALK)

DESANTIS: I think our support should be contingent on them doing it. And I would have support in China, to be able to take — to be able to take China and do what we need to do with China.

BAIER: Mr. Ramaswamy, you would not support an increase of funding to Ukraine?

RAMASWAMY: I would not. And I think that this is disastrous, that we are protecting against an invasion across somebody else’s border, when we should use those same military resources to prevent across the invasion of our own southern border here in the United States of America.

We are driving Russia further into China’s hands. The Russia-China alliance is the single greatest threat we face. And I find it offensive, that we have professional politicians on the stage that will make a pilgrimage to Kyiv, to their Pope, Zelenskyy, without doing the same thing for people in Maui or the Southside of Chicago or Kensington.

BAIER: All right, OK. Hold on.

RAMASWAMY: I think that we have to put the interests of Americans first. Secure our own border instead of somebody else’s. And the reality is this is also how we project strength and making America strong at home.

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: We heard the names, Governor Christie first.

CHRISTIE: All right, look, I did go to Ukraine. And I went to Ukraine, because I wanted to see for myself, what Vladimir Putin’s army was doing to the free Ukrainian people. And let me tell you, I want you all to look around this arena tonight. And imagine that every one of these seats was filled.

And if every one of them was filled, there would still be 2500 more children outside to make over 20,000 who have been abducted, stolen, ripped from their mothers and fathers and brought back to Russia to be programmed to fight their own families. They have gouged out people’s eyes, cut off their ears and shot people in the back of the head, men, and then gone into those homes and raped the — the daughters and the wives who were left as widows and orphans.

This is — this is the Vladimir Putin — this is the Vladimir Putin, who Donald Trump called brilliant and a genius. If we don’t stand up against this type of autocratic killing in the world, we will be next.

(CROSSTALK)

MACCALLUM: All right, we’ll go to Governor Haley right now. I have a question to Governor Haley, welcome back.

BAIER: Vice President Pence was mentioned, you get 30 seconds?

PENCE: Yeah. Well, let me — let me be clear, anybody that thinks that we can’t solve the problems here in the United States, and be the leader of the free world has a pretty small view of the greatest nation on Earth.

RAMASWAMY: That is incorrect.

PENCE: We can do both, Vivek. We’ve done both. We’ve been the leader of the free world, the arsenal democracy for years. The Reagan Doctrine years ago made it clear, we said, if you’re willing to fight the communists on your soil, we’ll give you the means to fight them there. So our troops don’t have to fight them.

Vivek, if we do the giveaway that you want to give to Putin to give him his land, is not going to be too long for he rolls across a NATO border. And frankly, our men and women of our armed forces are going to have to go and fight him. I want to let the Ukrainians fight and drive and the Russians back out —

(CROSSTALK)

RAMASWAMY: I wanted to just briefly address Pence. Vice President Pence, I have a newsflash. The USSR does not exist anymore. It fell back in 1990.

PENCE: Can I say…

(CROSSTALK)

RAMASWAMY: The real threat, you talked about the communists, and the real communists that we have to address right now is this…

PENCE: Do you not have any idea what Vladimir Putin’s aims are?

RAMASWAMY: You — you already spoke. Now I have something to say.

PENCE: Vladimir Putin…

MACCALLUM: Thirty seconds.

PENCE: … has been saying he wants to reestablish the old Soviet sphere of influence.

RAMASWAMY: You’ve — you’ve made your point, Vice President.

(CROSSTALK)

PENCE: … insulted him by calling him a communist. He is a dictator and a murderer and the United States of America needs to stand against authoritarianism…

(APPLAUSE)

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: Mr. Ramaswamy, 30 seconds.

RAMASWAMY: … respond. The real threat we face today is communist China. And we are driving Russia further into China’s arms. The Russia-China military alliance is the single greatest threat we face. Nobody in either political party is talking about it.

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: Mr. Vice President, we can’t hear. Mr. Vice President…

PENCE: … is to give Russia everything they’ve got…

BAIER: Mr. Vice President…

PENCE: Give them a promise that Ukraine will never be an NATO, and then somehow…

BAIER: Mr. Vice President…

PENCE: … China will not think about taking Taiwan. We achieve peace through strength.

(APPLAUSE)

BAIER: Mr. Vice President…

PENCE: And America needs to stand for freedom.

BAIER: OK. Here we go.

MACCALLUM: I think we need to reestablish some ground rules here, folks.

BAIER: When we hear this bell…

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

MACCALLUM: Yes. That means…

BAIER: … that means your time’s done.

MACCALLUM: You’re done.

BAIER: So, Mr. Vice President, we appreciate your aggressiveness here, 30 seconds is 30 seconds.

Mr. Ramaswamy, you were mentioned. You get 30 seconds.

RAMASWAMY: So the reality is that today — today…

(BOOING)

RAMASWAMY: … Ukraine is not a priority for the United States of America. And I think that the same people that took us into Iraq War, the same people who took us into the Vietnam War, you cannot end — you not start another no-win war. And I do not want to get to the point where we’re sending our military resources abroad when we could be better using them here at home to protect our own borders…

MACCALLUM: OK.

RAMASWAMY: … protect the homeland.

MACCALLUM: All right.

RAMASWAMY: That will be my top priority…

(CROSSTALK)

MACCALLUM: I think we gave you more than 30 seconds in the rebut. So I do want to get to some other people. Because everybody — we — we respect everybody’s time here.

So, Governor Haley, you did not raise your hand meaning that you would support more funding for the Ukraine War. You have said of Governor DeSantis that you did not appreciate it when he initially called it a territorial dispute. Why?

HALEY: First of all, the American president needs to have moral clarity. They need to know the difference between right and wrong. They need to know the difference between good and evil. When you look at the situation with Russia and Ukraine, here you have a pro-American country that was invaded by a thug.

So when you want to talk about what has been given to Ukraine, less than 3.5 percent of our defense budget has been given to Ukraine. If you look at the percentages per GDP, 11 of the European countries have given more than the US But what’s really important is go back to when China and Russia held hands, shook hands before the Olympics, and named themselves unlimited partners.

A win for Russia is a win for China. We have to know that. Ukraine is the first line of defense for us. And the problem that Vivek doesn’t understand is, he wants to hand Ukraine to Russia. He wants to let China eat Taiwan. He wants to go and stop funding Israel.

RAMASWAMY: False.

HALEY: You don’t do that to friends.

RAMASWAMY: False.

HALEY: What you do instead is you have the backs of your friends. Ukraine is a front line of defense. Putin has said if Russia — one Russia takes Ukraine, Poland and the Baltics are next. That’s a world war. We’re trying to prevent war. Look what Putin did today. He killed Prigozhin.

When I was at the U.N., the Russian ambassador suddenly died. This guy is a murderer. And you are choosing a murderer over a pro-American country.

(APPLAUSE)

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

RAMASWAMY: First of all…

BAIER: First of all, Mr. Ramaswamy, you have 30 seconds. Mr. DeSantis — Governor DeSantis…

RAMASWAMY: Nikki, I wish you well on your future career on the boards of Lockheed and Raytheon.

HALEY: Yes, I’m not on the boards of Lockheed and Raytheon.

RAMASWAMY: But the fact of the matter…

HALEY: And you know you have…

RAMASWAMY: Boeing came off of it. But you’ve…

HALEY: …brought down everybody on this…

RAMASWAMY: … been pushing this lie.

HALEY: … stage.

RAMASWAMY: You’ve been pushing this lie all week.

HALEY: But you — you want to go and defund Israel. You want to give Taiwan to China.

RAMASWAMY: OK. Let me address that. I’m glad you brought that up.

HALEY: Do you want to go and give Ukraine to Russia?

(APPLAUSE)

RAMASWAMY: I’m going to address each of those right now. This is…

(CROSSTALK)

RAMASWAMY: … the false lies of a professional politician that — there we have it.

HALEY: Under your watch, you would (inaudible)…

RAMASWAMY: So the reality is…

HALEY: … America less. You have no foreign policy experience and it shows.

RAMASWAMY: And you know what?

(APPLAUSE)

HALEY: It shows.

(APPLAUSE)

RAMASWAMY: The — the foreign policy experience that you all have shows in the bogus wars we’ve gotten into. I’ve addressed (ph) that.

So our relationship with Israel…

(CROSSTALK)

MACCALLUM: Thirty seconds.

RAMASWAMY: … be stronger than by the end of my first term. But it’s not a client relationship. It is a friendship. And you know what friends do? Friends help each other stand on their own two feet. So I will lead Abraham Accords 2.0. I will partner with Israel to make sure Iran never is nuclear-armed.

But you know what I love about Israel? And I have been there probably in the last 10 years more than most people on this stage. You know what I love about them? I love their border policies. I love their tough-on-crime policies. I love that they have a national identity and an Iron Dome to protect their homeland.

And so, yes, I want to learn from the friends that we’re supporting. And what puzzles me…

HALEY: No, you want cut the — aid off. And let me tell you…

RAMASWAMY: No, I want to learn from those and apply those to protect our homeland, Nikki.

HALEY: It’s not, then, Israel needs America. America needs Israel.

PENCE: Can we move on?

BAIER: OK, Governor DeSantis…

HALEY: That you’re the front line of defense to Iran.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

BAIER: Governor DeSantis, you were mentioned in the territorial dispute.

Not only…

HALEY: No, it’s not a territorial dispute either.

DESANTIS: So, as — as president of the United States, your first obligation is to defend our country and its people.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

DESANTIS: And that means you’re sending all this money, but you’re not doing what we need to do to secure our own border.

We have tens of thousands of people…

HALEY: We can do both at the same time.

DESANTIS: … who are being killed because — well, we’re not handling both.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

HALEY: And we can do both at the same time.

DESANTIS: And so I am going to declare it a national emergency.

I’m — I’m not going to send troops to Ukraine, but I am going to send them to our Southern border.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

DESANTIS: When these drug pushers are bringing fentanyl across the border, that’s going to be the last thing they do. We’re going to use force and we’re going to leave them stone-cold dead.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: We are actually going to move on to China.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

BAIER: We’re going to talk about China.

MACCALLUM: OK.

BAIER: But, Governor Burgum, China has the biggest navy in the world, the biggest army in the world. Now they have warships — warships off the coast of Alaska.

They are threatening Taiwan. In coming years, China will have 1,500 nuclear warheads, it’s believed. The US just arrested two sailors accused of spying for China within our military.

So, the question is, how would you deter China, as a President Burgum?

BURGUM: Well, this is the number one issue we’re facing.

And, of course, we haven’t been talking about it. And we act like that letting Russia win in the Ukraine is like a gimme, as opposed to a gift to China. Russia has become China’s gas station. But how would we do it?

The Biden administration is a complete fail. China imports 10 million barrels of oil a day, more than any other country in the world. They do not even have all the food they need to feed everybody in that country. So they don’t have energy security or food security.

But the Biden administration sends Blinken, Yellen over there. They — they’re — they’re over there talking. They don’t even bring up energy, because they’re too busy trying to kill the US energy here. And what we need to do is not meetings, not press releases, because something that would send a lot more than a press release is actually harpoon missiles.

We need anti-ship missiles on Taiwan. The way that you have a war never start, which is the goal, the way you have peace through strength is that you actually have strength. You actually have deterrence.

And what we have in — what we have got going on in Ukraine is an example of when deterrence failed, what is an example there of Biden’s disastrous withdrawal from Afghanistan, the fact that he green-lighted Putin moving into Ukraine, and then now they see weakness. And when they see weakness, they make a move.

And we have to be strong, and we have to be strong both in Ukraine, and we can solve the Southern border. Absolutely, we can do that, because guess what? There’s only 19,855 authorized people for the Border Patrol. But they’re not all staffed, because the Biden administration doesn’t enforce law enforcement.

But the Biden administration wanted to put 87,000 people in the IRS, as opposed to giving the money and the support we need to our own Border Patrol.

BAIER: OK.

MACCALLUM: Senator Scott?

BAIER: Senator Scott, on China, that same question.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

PENCE: Can I speak about China?

SCOTT: Let’s — let’s fire the 87,000 IRS agents and hire or double the number of Border Patrol agents.

I just left Yuma, Arizona, about two weeks ago. The most pressing need of the American people from a national security standpoint is our Southern border. It has led to the death of 70,000 Americans because of fentanyl, plus six million illegal crossings since President Biden has taken office. And 200 people on our national security watch list have been caught at our border?

How many have not been caught at our Southern border? If we just spend $10 billion, we could finish the wall. For $5 billion more, we could have the military-grade technology to surveil our Southern border to stop the flow of fentanyl and save 70,000 Americans a year.

That should be the priority of this government. And, as the next president of the United States, I will make that border wall complete.

MACCALLUM: Thank you.

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: There are many more questions on China. I do want to ask about…

BURGUM: I just want to say — I want to say — I want to say, I couldn’t agree more.

It’s not just the 70,000 from fentanyl. We have lost 200,000 people to overdoses since Biden took office. That’s 300 people a day. We’re taking mass casualties, and those aren’t — that’s a statistic. But these are sons and daughters, nieces and nephews that we’re losing.

We have got North Dakota troops down there flying night helicopter missions from San Diego to the Gulf Coast trying to stop these transnational criminal organizations. They have got better funding on their side than we have got on our side.

MACCALLUM: Yes. We’re going to talk more about that.

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: Speaking of which, Governor Hutchinson — speaking of which, images from earlier this month, Governor Hutchinson…

(CROSSTALK)

PENCE: Bret, I negotiated with Mexico the remain-in-Mexico policy.

BAIER: Vice President Pence, images from earlier this month…

PENCE: We built hundred miles of wall. We secured the Southern border of the United States.

BAIER: Vice President Pence, it really doesn’t help. I’m asking a question.

HALEY: Thank you.

BAIER: Earlier this month…

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

BAIER: Shh — images showed suspected cartel members crossing into Texas with rifles.

Do you consider this an invasion? Would you authorize lethal force along that border?

HUTCHINSON: There would be lethal force used by the Border Patrol, law enforcement as needed to protect the border, absolutely.

When you look at the military, the military has to be used for intelligence-gathering purposes. This is not unusual. Whenever I was in the Bush administration, we went down there and met with President Vicente Fox of Mexico and asked his help on going after the cartels.

And he looked at me and said, they’re a problem to us as well. And so we joined together, and we took down the Arellano-Felix brothers leading the Tijuana Cartel. And that made a difference. Ramon was shot and killed, and Benjamin was captured.

Cooperation makes a difference. We cannot be successful going against the cartel unless we bring in Mexico as a partner. We have to use economic pressure to accomplish that. President Obrador has not been helpful, and we have to use economic pressure that this administration is not using.

The rule of law has to matter on both sides of it.

MACCALLUM: OK.

HUTCHINSON: This is critical. I have done it. We know what needs to be done. The military has to be limited in its use.

When — after 9/11, we had the global war on terror, and guess what? We protected the border at the same time. You can do both.

(APPLAUSE)

MACCALLUM: OK, let’s go to Governor DeSantis.

So, as president, would you support sending US Special Forces over the border into Mexico to take out fentanyl labs, to take out drug cartel operations? Would you support that kind of American military use?

DESANTIS: Yes, and I will do it I’m day one.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

DESANTIS: Here’s the thing. The cartels are killing tens of thousands of our fellow citizens. You want to talk about a country in decline? You have the cartels controlling a lot of part of your Southern border?

We have to reestablish the rule of law, and we have to defend our people. The president of the United States has got to use all available powers as commander in chief to protect our country and to protect the people.

So, when they’re coming across, yes, we’re going to use lethal force. Yes, we reserve the right to operate. How many more tens of thousands are we going to let to die? I am sick. I have met Angel Moms throughout this country.

I met a lady in Texas named Tracy. And her son took one Percocet that was laced with fentanyl, immediately died. That is happening all across this country because of the poison that they are bringing in. So, as president, would I use force? Would I treat them as foreign terrorist organizations? You’re darn right I would.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

BAIER: Vice President Pence…

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

BAIER: Vice President Pence, why would you be better at this issue than Governor DeSantis?

Governor DeSantis on the campaign trail refers your administration as not finishing the wall.

PENCE: Right.

(LAUGHTER)

PENCE: Right.

Look, we secured the Southern border of the United States of America and reduced illegal immigration and asylum abuse by 90 percent.

(APPLAUSE)

PENCE: When Joe Biden took over, he threw open the Southern border of the United States.

HALEY: Yes.

PENCE: And the wave of humanity, the wave of fentanyl that’s been eloquently described here is a wave of human tragedy across this country.

But, Martha, you began this evening talking about who is best prepared to be the next president of the United States. And I have to tell you, with all humility, I was there when we negotiated through the government shutdown and got the funding available to build the wall.

I was negotiating on Capitol Hill around the clock. I negotiated the remain-in-Mexico policy on behalf of the president of the United States.

And, Asa, you’re so right. It’s because we used economic pressure to bring the Mexicans to the table, and they allowed us to have people wait in Mexico while they applied for asylum and ended asylum abuse overnight. We got the Mexicans to deploy their National Guard to their Southern border and to our Southern border as never before.

And I want to promise you, as president of the United States of America, I will engage Mexico the exact same way, and we will partner with the Mexican military, and we will hunt down and destroy the cartels that are claiming lives in the United States of America.

(APPLAUSE)

MACCALLUM: OK. Thank you. Another issue that is related to this is that almost 7 million migrants have crossed this border, our southern border during the Biden administration. So Governor Christie, what would you do about the 7 million who are here? How would you handle that? What would you do?

CHRISTIE: Look, Martha, the first thing we need to do is to stop any more from coming. That’s the first thing we need to do. Then, the next thing we need to do with the folks that are here is to, again, as we’ve talked about all night, tonight, we have to have one order in this country, we have to enforce the law. And what that means is to make sure that people who come here illegally are not rewarded for being here illegally.

We have so many wonderful people from around the world, who are waiting in line following the law to try to come here and pursue the American dream. And those people are waiting and waiting and waiting. Because we haven’t dealt with the problem of the folks who are here. We have to have them detained. We have to make sure that they are not rewarded for having broken the law.

And one last thing on this fentanyl issue, with China, we can’t take our eye off of that ball. Yes, it’s important that we secure the border, very important as I just said, but China is sending these chemicals to these drug cartels for them to create the fentanyl that is killing hundreds of thousands of our citizens. The Chinese are engaging in an act of war against us killing our citizens. We better make that priority one in our conversations with China and to try to straighten that relationship out because if we don’t, we’re going to lose more and more of our citizens.

MACCALLUM: I just to clarify, would you send those people back?

CHRISTIE: Of course. You’d have to.

BAIER: We have a lot of issues that Americans care about. Next up, we’re going to talk about the crisis in education, as millions of American children are not proficient in reading or math, after this.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

BAIER: The nation’s report card was the weakest ever for American school children, exposing chronic absenteeism, deep declines for reading and math for 15-year-olds and 13-year-olds.

Governor DeSantis, you would eliminate, you said, the Department of Education. But as president, would you have a responsibility to fix this crisis as we see it?

DESANTIS: Absolutely. The decline in education is one of the major reasons why our country is in decline. We need education in this country, not indoctrination in this country.

(APPLAUSE)

DESANTIS: And in Florida — Florida, we stood up for what was right. First, we had schools open during COVID. And a lot of the problems that we’ve seen are because these lockdown states locked their kids out of school for a year, year-and-a-half. That was wrong. We stood up.

I took a lot of fire for that. I was — I was pilloried by the media. But I stood for our kids. And as president, I’ll stand for you and your kids as well.

But we have to make sure that what our schools are doing is focusing on solid academics. In Florida, we eliminated Critical Race Theory from our K through 12 schools.

(APPLAUSE)

DESANTIS: We eliminated gender ideology from our K through 12 schools. And we have elevated the importance of American civics and teaching our kids about the Constitution and the Bill of Rights.

As president, I’m going to lead an effort to increase civic understanding and knowledge of our Constitution. We cannot be graduating students that don’t have any foundation in what it means to be an American.

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: Mr. Ramaswamy — Mr. Ramaswamy…

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: Mr. Pence — Mr. Ramaswamy — hold on, Senator Scott.

You’ve said that the Department of Education, the FBI, the ATF, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the IRS, the Department of Commerce, many of these should not exist.

RAMASWAMY: That’s correct.

BAIER: So…

(APPLAUSE)

BAIER: … to the education question, how would you deal with the crisis?

RAMASWAMY: So, look, we have a crisis of achievement. Let’s shut down the head of the snake, the Department of Education. Take that $80 billion, put it in the hands of the parents across this country. This is the civil rights issue of our time. Allow any parent to choose where they send their kids to school. End the teachers unions at the local level to allow public schools to compete.

(APPLAUSE)

RAMASWAMY: And then revive our national identity where every high school senior should have to pass the same civics test that, frankly, every immigrant, including my mother, had to pass in order to become a citizen of this country.

(APPLAUSE)

RAMASWAMY: And the fact of the matter is, look, there is a part of education policy that also rests with the family. I didn’t grow up in money. But you know the word privilege gets used a lot. Well, you know what? I did have the ultimate privilege of two parents in the house with a focus on educational achievement. And I want every kid to enjoy that.

So part of the problem is we also have a federal government that pays single women more not to have a man in the house than to have a man in the house contributing to an epidemic of fatherlessness. And I think that goes hand-in-glove with the education crisis as well because we have to remember education starts with the family.

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

RAMASWAMY: And the nuclear family is the greatest form of governance known to mankind.

(APPLAUSE)

MACCALLUM: OK. So, Governor Burgum, Governor Haley has said — Governor Haley has said that biological boys playing in girls’ sports is the women’s issue of our time. You said that even though you signed a ban on this in North Dakota that there hadn’t been one instance where it was actually needed. Are you saying that you think that too much is made of this issue?

BURGUM: No, I’m saying in North Dakota we made a priority of protecting women’s sports. And we’ve done that in our state. But I would absolutely do that.

But I do think when we start talking about education and we think that we’re going to have a federal government one-size-fits-all, we’re just completely losing track of the fact that education differs by state. Some — some school districts are doing a fantastic job. Some less so. But the idea that every school district and state and every teacher is somehow indoctrinating people is just false.

You know, when I was building a company from scratch with small-town kids, and we went — grew up in a town of 300, but we built a global company in 132 countries with over 100,000 customers, we listened to those customers.

We spent time with them. We talked to them. We did that. And, as governor, well, education is one of the biggest part of a state budget. So, as a governor, I go, I shadow a student. I don’t — the night before, I find out the student’s — and the student finds out I’m going to go to every class with them.

I don’t sit and lecture school districts how to do it. I go and see the experience. And there’s a lot of things that have to change. But what needs to change in education is — it’s innovation. We’re doing it the same way we did it 50 years ago.

With innovation, not regulation, I would get rid of the Department of Education. I would give block grants to schools, but I’d give them on merit based on who’s doing the most innovative — I just got done holding the seventh annual Governors Conference on Innovation and Education.

You should see what the people are doing when you get — you cut loose the red tape, get the burden off their back. They care. Teachers in this country, the vast majority of them care about those kids. They’re working in low-paying jobs, and they’re fighting, fighting for those kids and their families.

BAIER: Get another former governor to weigh in on this.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

MACCALLUM: Governor Haley, you said that this is the women’s issue of our time?

HALEY: So, first, I will tell you, as — you know, as a parent, the one thing you want is for your child to have a better life than you did.

And we can talk about all of these things, and there’s a lot of crazy, woke things happening in schools, but we have got to get these kids reading. If a child can’t read by third grade, they’re four times less likely to graduate high school.

So we need to make sure we bring in reading remediation all over this country. We need transparency in the classroom, because parents should never have to wonder what’s being said or taught to their children in the classroom.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

HALEY: Parents need to be deciding which schools their kids go to, because they know best.

And let’s put vocational classes back into the high schools. Let’s teach our kids to build things again.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

(CROSSTALK)

HALEY: When we do that, and we allow that innovation, that’s when it’ll get back.

And, yes, I will always say, I’m going to fight for girls all day long, because strong girls become strong women. Strong women become strong leaders.

HUTCHINSON: Another…

HALEY: And biological boys don’t belong in the locker rooms of any of our girls.

HUTCHINSON: Another point on education, another point.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

MACCALLUM: We’re going to start the lightning round, and the first question is going to go to you, Vice President.

So, this is a lightning round of questions, 30-second answers, please.

President Biden will be 82 years old on Inauguration Day. Nearly 70 percent of Americans say that he is too old to serve. Should presidents have to pass a mental and physical test in order to serve, Vice President Pence?

PENCE: Well, it might be a good idea to have everybody in Washington, D.C., pass a mental…

(LAUGHTER)

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

PENCE: But, 30 seconds, no.

The American people can make those judgments. But let me say, I’m running for president of the United States because we don’t need a president who’s too old, and we don’t need a president who’s too young.

(LAUGHTER)

PENCE: We need a president who’s been there.

We need a president who knows how Congress works, how the White House works, how states work. And on this education issue, Martha, I was fighting against No Child Left Behind when Republicans were doubling the Department of Education. I will also shut down the federal Department of Education.

And when I was governor, we doubled the size of the largest school choice program in America, and we will give school choice to every family in America when I’m in the White House.

BAIER: So, this is a lightning round.

Mr. Ramaswamy, I think you were mentioned there.

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: You’re 38. You’re the youngest on the stage.

You have said and you just said you want a civics test or public service for those under 25 to be able to vote. So, the question is, do you want a mental acuity test for presidents over 75?

RAMASWAMY: I believe in the people of this country to tell the difference between somebody who’s an automaton and somebody who’s actually a thinking agent in the White House, which we don’t have in there today.

And I will tell you, I want to address Vice President Pence’s comment. I think we do need somebody of a different generation to lead this nation forward.

(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)

RAMASWAMY: Look at the way I have run this campaign, going to the South Side of Chicago, to Kensington, in the middle of Philadelphia, where traditional Republican candidates don’t go.

We have an opportunity to build a multiethnic working-class majority to deliver a landslide. And I think I’m the only candidate in this race, young or old, black or white, to bring all of those voters along to deliver a Reagan 1980 Revolution.

We’re going to do it in 2024.

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: Same — same question to you, Governor Asa…

(CROSSTALK)

PENCE: … never voted in a presidential election until 2020.

BAIER: OK.

MACCALLUM: Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. Hold on.

RAMASWAMY: I will answer that. I will answer that.

(CROSSTALK)

MACCALLUM: You get 30 seconds, 30 seconds.

RAMASWAMY: Thirty-second quick answer to that.

(CROSSTALK)

HALEY: You guys need — you all need to get control all of this debate. You have to get control of this debate.

MACCALLUM: Everything is going to get…

(CROSSTALK)

BAIER: Listen, listen, we’re getting control of the debate.

This is a lightning round, not rolling thunder.

(LAUGHTER)

BAIER: Governor Hutchinson, you have 30 seconds on the same question.

HUTCHINSON: On education, first of all, look at Arkansas.

We have to compete with China. I built computer science education. We led the nation in computer science education, going from 1,100 students to 23,000 students taking it. This is how you compete with China.

As president of the United States, I will make sure we go from 51 percent of our schools offering computer science to every school in rural areas and urban areas offering computer science for the benefit of our kids, and we can compete with China in terms of technology.

MACCALLUM: OK, thank you, sir.

SCOTT: Biden — President Biden is —

(CROSSTALK)

MACCALLUM: This is going to — this is coming to you. We are trying to do a quick round of different topics here.

So, Senator Scott, faith is on decline in this country. You talked about it a little bit before tonight.

So, is there a role for president of the United States in changing that? What would you do to change that?

SCOTT: Well, our nation was founded upon the Judeo Christian values that has made this the greatest nation on God’s Green Earth. I’m a big believer in Ephesians 3:20 that God is able to do exceedingly, abundantly above all that we ask or imagine. Our responsibility should be the modeled behavior we want others to follow.

On education — the only way we change education in this nation is to break the backs of the teachers unions.

(CHEERS)

SCOTT: They are standing in the door house of our kids, locking them into failing schools and locking them out of the greatest future they can have.

BAIER: As president, Governor DeSantis, would you support some mandatory military service for all Americans.

DESANTIS: I think it should be voluntary. I’m somebody that volunteered to serve, inspired by September 11th. And I’ve deployed Iraq alongside US Navy SEALs, in places like Fallujah and Ramadi.

And it’s something that I think has taught me — you know, when you go in that type of environment, anything you have, your personal agenda, you check it at the door. You go there and it’s about focusing on the mission above all else. And guys come together and they get it done.

And that’s how I would view being the president of the United States. It’s not about me. It’s not about all these other side issues. My sole focus will be on your future and reversing this country’s decline.

MACCALLUM: OK. Now for something a little out of this world and this is for you, Governor Christie, do you believe the recent spike in UFO encounters —

(LAUGHTER)

CHRISTIE: I get the UFO question? Come on, man.

(LAUGHTER)

MACCALLUM: OK. We’ve been hearing a lot of — we’ve been hearing a lot of testimony in Congress, and people are taking this a lot more seriously. And we’re hearing that, you know, there are things going on that people aren’t aware of.

(LAUGHTER)

MACCALLUM: So, if you were president, Governor Christie, would you level with the American people about what the government knows about these possible encounters?

CHRISTIE: Look, Martha, and it’s especially coming from a woman from New Jersey, I think it’s horrible that just because I’m from New Jersey, you ask me about unidentified flying objects and Martians. We’re different, but we’re not that different.

(LAUGHTER)

CHRISTIE: Look, of course — the job of the president of the United States is to level with the American people about everything. The job of the president of the United States is to stand for truth. The job of the president of the United States is to be a role model for our children and our grandchildren.

And so, whether it was UFOs or this problem of education, and Tim’s right, by the way, and I started this in 2010 by going right after the teachers unions in New Jersey and drove them down to an all-time low popularity rating because they’re putting themselves before our kids. That is our biggest threat to our country, not UFOs.

(CHEERS)

BAIER: OK. Well, coming up, we’ve got closing arguments.

Plus, right after the debate, Hannity is live from the spin room right here in Fiserv Forum with reaction from all the candidates as soon as they step off the stage.

We’ll be back after this.

(COMMERCIAL BREAK)

MACCALLUM: A live look at the Reagan Library as the sun sets in Simi Valley, California. We’ll see you there next month when our colleagues at Fox Business host the next 2024 showdown.

BAIER: Fox Business is partnering with Univision, the Reagan Foundation and Rumble to bring you the second Republican presidential debate on September 27. That looks pretty nice there. 20 years ago, 70 percent of American adults said they were extremely proud to be an American. That number has now plummeted to just 39 percent. In his pitch to get to the Oval Office, President Reagan called America the shining city on a hill, a beacon of hope and optimism.

MACCALLUM: So in your closing statement tonight, please tell American voters why you are the person who can inspire this nation to a better day. These are 45 seconds and we begin with Governor Burgum.

BURGUM: I understand why America is hurting. Biden’s inflation is choking us. I grew up in a small town. My dad died when I was a freshman in high school. My mom widow with three went back to work. Every job I had growing up was one right took a shower at the end of the day, not at the beginning of the day. Our cities are less safe because of the fentanyl pouring into this country, our economy is being crushed by Biden’s energy policies, which are raising the cost of every product you buy, not just the gasoline at the pump. One thing that I’ll do as president, I’ll secure the border. I’ll get this economy sprinting, not crawling like it is right now.

And I would say that other thing is for sure, when I’m on a horseback in the Badlands of North Dakota, it looks like the horizon is just limitless. And…

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

BURGUM: … when you can almost see beyond that horizon, you can see that this great country, our future, is unlimited. But we’ve got to focus on innovation, not regulation. We’ve got to cut the red tape. We’ve got to drive ourselves forward. The way we win the cold war with China is by growing our economy and through innovation.

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

BURGUM: And as president, I will bring out the best of America. I will improve every American life.

(APPLAUSE)

BAIER: Governor Hutchinson.

MACCALLUM: Well, we hope you’re back on your horse soon, Governor.

BAIER: Governor Hutchinson.

HUTCHINSON: Our nation is in trouble. And it’s in trouble because of failed leadership. And the solution is not four more years of Joseph Biden. The solution is not four more years of Donald Trump. The solution is new leadership that can bring bold ideas to America and to bring out the best of America.

A president’s number one responsibility is to bring out the best of our people. That’s what Ronald Reagan did. And he did it with optimism and hope for our country with consistent conservatism. That’s exactly what I bring.

As president, I’ll bring out the best of America in terms of individual responsibility, building our economy, in terms of securing our border, enforcing the rule of law. I will bring out the best of America in terms…

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

HUTCHINSON: … of our national character, our faith, and our hope for the future. Join in this fight, asa2024.com.

MACCALLUM: Thank you.

Senator Scott.

SCOTT: Thank you. I was a disillusioned young man growing up in a single-parent household mired in poverty. I wondered if the American dream was real for a kid like me. I can stand before you today and say the dream is alive. It is well. And it is healthy.

I have the good fortune of a mom who worked 16-hour days making sure we had food on our tables. She taught me that if you’re able-bodied in America, you work. If you take out a loan, you pay it back. If you commit a violent crime, you go to the jail. And if God made you a man, you play sports against men.

(LAUGHTER)

(APPLAUSE)

SCOTT: I’m Tim Scott. I’m asking you for your vote. And if you’re in Iowa, I’m asking you to caucus for me. You can go to votetimscott.com for more information or to make a contribution.

(APPLAUSE)

BAIER: Governor Christie.

CHRISTIE: Thank you, Bret. Thank you, Martha.

Look, everybody on this stage wants to be the next president of the United States. And the only way that’s going to happen is if we beat Joe Biden. I’m the only one on this stage who has every beaten a Democratic incumbent in an election. I did it in a deep blue state being outspent three to one.

Beating a Democratic incumbent is not easy. The last Democratic incumbent president who was defeated was Jimmy Carter. And he was defeated by a conservative governor from a blue state who knew how to get results, who stood for the truth, who cared about accountability, and stood strong and hard against waste.

Those are the very things that I did in my eight years as governor of New Jersey. And it’s exactly what I’ll do as president of the United States. Believe me, the Democrats…

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

CHRISTIE: … want some other nominee who has never beaten a Democratic incumbent. I’m the one who can win this race. And if you give me the chance, I will restore our country by winning it.

MACCALLUM: Thank you.

(APPLAUSE)

MACCALLUM: Governor Haley.

HALEY: Several weeks ago, I dropped my husband Michael, a combat veteran from Afghanistan, off at 4:00am for another year-long deployment. I watched him and 230 soldiers pick up their two duffel bags of belongings to go to a country they had never been, all in the name of protecting America.

If they are willing to protect us from there, we should be willing to fight for America here. I will beat Joe Biden and he knows that. I will strengthen our economy and we will bring this inflation down. We will put transparency in the classroom. We will secure our borders. We will have the backs of our law enforcement. And we will make sure we have a strong national security.

And, once again, we will make sure we have an America that is strong and proud. We have a country…

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

HALEY: … to save, join us. Go to nikkihaley.com, and let’s get it done.

(APPLAUSE)

BAIER: Vice President Pence.

PENCE: Thank you, Bret and Martha, for this evening. It’s an honor to be here.

Joe Biden has weakened America at home and abroad. The disastrous withdrawal from Afghanistan, their war on energy, runaway spending that launched the worst inflation in 40 years, a crisis at our southern border, an assault on our values and liberties.

And the American people have had enough. But I know we can bring it back. But different times call for different leadership. The Republican Party owes the American people the choice. Proven leadership at the national level that knows how to move a conservative agenda forward.

We proved in the Trump-Pence years you can turn this country around faster than you can imagine. And I have faith we will again. Because I have faith in the American people, the good, decent, hard-working…

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

PENCE: … faith-filled, idealistic people of this country. And I have faith that God is not done with America yet. And if we will renew our faith in one another, and renew our faith in him, who has ever guided this nation since we arrived on these wilderness shores…

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

PENCE: … I know the best days for the greatest nation on earth are yet to come.

(APPLAUSE)

MACCALLUM: Thank you.

Mr. Ramaswamy.

RAMASWAMY: I was born in 1985. And I grew up into a generation where we were taught to celebrate our diversity and our differences so much that we forgot all of the ways we are really just the same as Americans, bound by a common set of ideals that set this nation into motion in 1776. And this is our moment to revive those common ideals.

God is real. There are two genders. Fossil fuels are a requirement for human prosperity. Reverse-racism is racism. An open border is not a border. Parents determine the education of their children. The nuclear family is the greatest form of governance known to man. Capitalism lifts us up from poverty. There are three branches of government…

(DOUBLE BELL SOUND)

RAMASWAMY: … not four. And the US Constitution, it is the strongest guarantor of freedom in human history. That is what won us the American Revolution. That is what will win us the revolution of 2024.

Thanks for letting me introduce myself tonight. Thank you.

(APPLAUSE)

BAIER: Governor DeSantis. Governor?

DESANTIS: This is our time for choosing. We will send Joe Biden back to his basement and we will reverse the decline of this country. I’m a blue collar kid. I worked minimum wage jobs to be able to make ends meet. I understand the importance of the American dream. And I know how that slipped away from so many millions of Americans. We’ll restore it.

I’m a veteran who served in Iraq. I know what it means to put service above self. I’m also a dad and a husband to a 6-, 5-, and 3-year-old. I understand the importance of protecting parents’ rights and the well-being of our children.

In Florida, we showed it could be done. I made promises and I delivered on all of those promises. 2024 is make or break. We’re not getting a mulligan. No excuses. I will get the job done and as your president, I will not let you down. God bless you all.

(APPLAUSE)

BAIER: Well, we want to say thank you. Thank you to all the candidates on the stage tonight, and thank you to Milwaukee.

MACCALLUM: Thank you, everybody. We will see you on the campaign trail, from debates to primaries to the general election and the conventions before that. Thanks for joining us.

Sean Hannity from the spin room starts right now.

BAIER: Take it away, Sean.

MACCALLUM: Take it away, Sean.

List of Speakers

FORMER VICE PRESIDENT MIKE PENCE, R-IND., PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE
FORMER GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE, R-N.J., PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE
FORMER GOV. NIKKI HALEY, R-S.C., PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE
VIVEK RAMASWAMY, REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE
FORMER GOV. ASA HUTCHINSON, R-ARK., PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE
GOV. RON DESANTIS, R-FLA., PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE
GOV. DOUG BURGUM, R-N.D., PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE
SEN. TIM SCOTT, R-S.C., PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE
MARTHA MACCALLUM, CO-MODERATOR
BRET BAIER, CO-MODERATOR
RECENT STORIES
House Rules Committee Chairman Tom Cole, R-Okla., attends the panel's hearing on the impeachment inquiry of President Joe Biden in the Capitol on Dec. 12, 2023. 
Cole considered early favorite to win House Appropriations gavel
Former Sen. Joseph I. Lieberman talks with reporters as he walks through the Senate subway in Washington on June 22, 2021. 
Joseph Lieberman, an iconoclast who frustrated the Democratic Party, dies at 82
Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg speaks about Tuesday’s collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge in Baltimore during a White House press briefing Wednesday. Vice Admiral Peter W. Gautier, Coast Guard deputy commandant for operations, is standing behind him.
Officials: Baltimore bridge price tag could be at least $2 billion
Rep. Marie Gluesenkamp Perez, D-Wash., won a seat in 2022 that went Republican for president in 2020, and faces a Toss-up race in November.
Race to House majority runs through the 10 Toss-ups
Rep. Ann McLane Kuster, D-N.H., will not seek another term in November.
Kuster will not seek reelection in New Hampshire
Migrants from Peru and Venezuela walk down a trail on the U.S. side of the Rio Grande river Tuesday in El Paso, Texas. 
Appeals court extends hold on Texas deportation law
THE SOURCE FOR NEWS ON
CAPITOL HILL SINCE 1955
About
Contact Us
Advertise
Events
Privacy
RC Jobs
Newsletters
The Staff
Subscriptions
CQ Roll Call is a part of FiscalNote, the leading technology innovator at the intersection of global business and government. Copyright 2023 CQ Roll Call. All rights reserved.

Skip to content
Why Rev?
Services
Solutions
Developers
Resources
Rev
Login
Get Started
« Return to Transcript Library home

Search
Sep 28, 2023

Second Republican Presidential Primary Debate Transcript
Second Republican Presidential Primary Debate Transcript
Rev › Blog › Transcripts › GOP › Second Republican Presidential Primary Debate Transcript
The second Republican Presidential Primary Debate from the Air Force One Pavilion at the Reagan Library in Simi Valley, CA. Read the transcript here.



Transcribe Your Own Content

Try Rev and save time transcribing, captioning, and subtitling.

Search the transcript here...
Speaker 1 (00:00):

High on the hills of California’s Simi Valley stands a monument to one of the most beloved leaders in our nation’s history. Ronald Reagan, the Gipper, the great communicator. America’s 40th commander in chief. He railed against big government.

Ronald Reagan (00:20):

The nine most terrifying words in the English language are, “I’m from the government and I’m here to help.”

Speaker 1 (00:28):

And sought peace through strength.

Ronald Reagan (00:30):

Mr. Gorbachev tear down this wall.

Speaker 1 (00:36):

40 years after Reagan’s landslide reelection, the Republican Party faces critical questions. What does it mean to be a conservative?

Vivek Ramaswamy (00:45):

We fight for the truth.

Ron DeSantis (00:47):

We are not going to worry about what the left and the media say about us.

Speaker 1 (00:53):

What is the key to a thriving economy?

Doug Burgum (00:56):

It’s innovation, not regulation.

Tim Scott (00:58):

America could do for anyone what she’s done for me.

Nikki Haley (01:01):

We will stop the spending. We will stop the borrowing. We will stop the earmarks.

Speaker 1 (01:06):

What is America’s role in the world?

Mike Pence (01:08):

We need to build a military fitted to the widening challenges in an evermore dangerous world.

Chris Christie (01:15):

Sometimes you avoid war by showing the tough.

Speaker 1 (01:19):

And the country faces even more challenges. Would Reagan even recognize the country in which we now live. Tonight, candidates seeking the Republican nomination converge in California to chart a new path for the Grand Old Party. Now is the time for choosing.

Stuart Varney (01:46):

Welcome to the second Republican debate at the [inaudible 00:01:52] in California. We’re inside the spectacular Air Force One pavilion where the stage is set for a showdown. I’m Stuart Varney, at Fox business, and I am thrilled to be sitting alongside my co-moderators, Fox News Channel Dana Perino and Ilia Calderón [inaudible 00:02:14] division. Good evening.

Ilia Calderón (02:17):

Good evening. Thank you. Thank you Stuart. President Reagan famously described America as a shining city on a hill and tonight seven candidates will make the case they should be the one to lead that city into a brighter tomorrow, but first they have to convince you, the voter. Please allow me to welcome our Spanish-speaking audience, [Spanish 00:02:42] Ronald Reagan [Spanish 00:02:45].

Dana Perino (02:52):

And good evening. So let’s meet the candidates who have qualified and chosen to be on this stage tonight. They are positioned by the order they rank in the polls with the highest polling candidate in the middle. Standing center stage, Florida Governor Ron DeSantis.

Stuart Varney (03:08):

[inaudible 00:03:08] the governor, entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy and former South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley.

Ilia Calderón (03:23):

Next is South Carolina Senator Tim Scott and former New Jersey Governor Chris Christie.

Dana Perino (03:32):

On the wings tonight, former Vice President Mike Pence and North Dakota Governor Doug Burgum.

Stuart Varney (03:44):

We have questions on a wide variety of issues important to primary voters. Candidates get one minute to answer and 30 seconds to respond if singled out. When their time runs out, we’ll all hear this. We have a lot of ground to cover, so please keep it civilized.

Dana Perino (04:04):

Let’s get going. We are in this spacious, sunny place tonight, designed to reflect the very nature and character of Ronald Reagan. It’s a place that makes you proud to be an American, yet today our nation is drowning in division and incivility.

Ilia Calderón (04:23):

Voters say they dread the 2024 election and find politics exhausting. Two in three Americans think the country is on the wrong track and three in four say the economy is not in good shape.

Stuart Varney (04:38):

Prices are up 18% since 2020. More than half of the US population has little access to childcare. 85% of Americans say their personal finances are a source of stress.

Dana Perino (04:53):

Americans want to believe a leader who says, “You can follow me, I’ve got you. Don’t worry.” President Biden is trying to do that with Bidenomics.

Stuart Varney (05:03):

And yesterday he joined the picket lines where auto workers are demanding more wages and job security. Senator Scott, you recently reacted by praising Ronald Reagan for firing air traffic controllers in the 1980s, saying, “You strike, you’re fired.” Would you fire thousands of striking auto workers today Senator?

Tim Scott (05:25):

Obviously the President of the United States cannot fire anybody in the private sector. However, we should look back at the first bill in Congress under Joe Biden. The first bill had $86 billion for the union pensions because they continue to over-promise yet under-deliver. One of the challenges that we have in the current negotiations is that they want four day French work weeks, but more money. They want more benefits working fewer hours. That is simply not going to stand. I sat in a finance committee hearing when a widow came before the committee whose promised pensions from the unions, $4,000 a month. Unfortunately it had been cut to a thousand dollars a month. We must make sure that we honor the commitments that we make and one of the ways that we do that, do not over-promise and then under-deliver and leave the taxpayers on the hook.

(06:22)
I’ll say this, Joe Biden should not be on the picket line. He should be on the southern border working to close our southern border because it is unsafe, wide open and insecure, leading to the deaths of 70,000 Americans in the last 12 months because of fentanyl. It is devastating. Every county in America is now a border county because fentanyl has devastated Americans in every single state. I will also say 6 million illegal crossings since Joe Biden has taken office and he eliminated Title 42. The one thing he should do is finish the wall, reinstate title 42 and get the job done.

Dana Perino (07:11):

Well, I can promise you that we are going to have a lot of questions on the border and immigration, but in the meantime we do want to talk about the economy and jobs and especially want to talk about this strike for just a moment more. Mr. Ramaswamy, you’ve said you really empathize with the strikers. You’re standing next to Senator Scott, and do you agree with what he said or do you think he’s wrong?

Vivek Ramaswamy (07:30):

I agree with some of what he said for sure, I like the spirit of it. I’ll say that I don’t have a lot of patience for the union bosses, I think that’s where he and I actually have a common view. I do have a lot of sympathy for the workers however. People are going through real hardship in this country. I’ve been through hardship growing up. My father stared down layoff, said GE under Jack Welch’s tenure at the GE plant in Evendale, Ohio. My mom had to work overtime in nursing homes in Southwest Ohio to make ends meet and pay off our home loan. So I understand that hardship is not a choice, but victimhood is a choice, and we choose to be victorious in the United States of America.

(08:10)
You know what? If I was giving advice to those workers, I would say go pick it in front of the White House in Washington DC. That’s really where the protest needs to be. Disastrous economic policies that have driven up prices that have driven up interest rates and mortgage rates at the same time wages remaining stagnant. What we need is to deliver economic growth in this country, unlock American energy, drill, frack, burn coal, embrace nuclear energy, put people back to work by no longer paying them more money to stay at home, stabilize the US dollar itself and rescind a majority of those unconstitutional federal regulations that are hampering our economy. That is how we unleash American exceptionalism. And that’s not a democratic vision or a Republican vision, that is an American vision that we embrace economic growth, and capitalism is still the best system known to man to lift us up from poverty and we should not apologize for it. That’s what it means to be an American.

Stuart Varney (09:16):

Together, the CEOs of General Motors, Ford and Stellantis make 336 times the number of rank and file workers. That’s just part of a wider income inequality trend in the country. The richest 1% now controls one fifth of all income. Vice President Pence, last week you said you side with American workers, but you also support how these companies operate, which is it?

Mike Pence (09:48):

Well, thank you for the question. I want to thank Univision and Fox Business for assembling such a wonderful forum.

(09:55)
Look, I do disagree with something Tim Scott just said. Joe Biden doesn’t belong on a picket line, he belongs on the unemployment line. Look, I’m from the second leading manufacturing state in the country per capita, I was governor of the state of Indiana. We brought 12,000 factories back to America during our administration, I know something about manufacturing. And I got to tell you, while the union bosses are talking about class warfare and talking about disparity in wages, I have to tell you I really believe what’s driving that is Bidenomics has failed. Wages are not keeping up with inflation. Auto workers and all American workers are feeling it and families are struggling in this economy. And Joe Biden’s Green New Deal agenda is good for Beijing and bad for Detroit. We ought to repeal the Green New Deal, get rid of the mandates and subsidies that are driving American gasoline, automotive manufacturing, into the graveyard. And beyond that also, as President of the United States, I’ll be standing with workers all across America and I’ll be standing for the right to work, of every American to join a union or not join a union as they decide.

Stuart Varney (11:09):

Senator Scott, you were mentioned will you care to respond?

Tim Scott (11:12):

There’s no doubt that Joe Biden needs to be fired, that’s why I’m running for president. I look forward to being the next President of the United States. I will also say I know America can do for anyone what she’s done for me. It’s why we’re focusing on restoring hope, creating opportunities and protecting the America we all love. Growing up in a single parent household, I wondered if the American dream would work for a kid in the inner city. I’ve got good news for every single child, whether you’re in the inner cities of Chicago or the rural parts of Iowa; America and the dream, it is alive, it is well and it is healthy. God bless these United States of America.

Stuart Varney (11:55):

Governor Haley, you raised your hand.

Nikki Haley (11:58):

Yeah, I think we need to look at exactly what happened. Biden showed up on that picket line, but why are those workers actually there? It’s because of all of the spending that he has pushed through in the economy that’s raised the inflation. So when you look at the fact that we are paying higher gas prices, higher grocery prices, $7,000 more a year for families, what we need to do is… I came out with an economic plan. Eliminate the gas and diesel tax so that they have more money in their pocket. Let’s focus on going after middle America and cutting taxes for middle America and collapsing those brackets. Let’s get rid of unfair distortions like the state and local tax that they give to wealthy people in blue states and paid by red states. And let’s make sure we make the small business taxes permanent. They only made those temporary, they made the corporate taxes permanent. Let’s focus on what it takes to get more cash in the pockets of workers, that’s when we’ll be able to deal with strikes like this. Not sitting on a picket line like Joe Biden is.

Ilia Calderón (12:57):

Thank you Governor Haley. We have other questions to get to about economy. Allow me to-

Doug Burgum (13:01):

I just have to… I’m sorry.

Ilia Calderón (13:02):

Allow me to, allow me to-

Doug Burgum (13:04):

I’m sorry. I have to jump in because we’re missing the point and every other network is missing the point. The reason why people are striking in Detroit is because Joe Biden’s interference with capital markets and with free markets. The subsidies, we’re subsidizing the automakers and we’re subsidizing the cars and a particular kind of car. Not every car, we’re particularly subsidizing electric vehicles. And when you decide that we’re going to take all of your taxpayer monies, take a billion dollars, subsidize a certain type of vehicle, and the batteries come from China. China controls 85% of the rare earth minerals. They’re called rare earth because they’re measured in parts per million. China is moving a hundred thousand pounds of earth in Indonesia, in Africa. They’re literally destroying the planet so that they can make a battery that’s in a car subsidized here. That’s why they’re striking because they need two thirds less workers to build an electric car. Joe Biden, this strike is at Joe Biden’s feet.

Stuart Varney (13:57):

[inaudible 00:14:02]

Ilia Calderón (14:02):

We’re going to keep the topic of economy but allow me to the following question to Governor Christie. The Government will shut down if Congress does not reach a deal by the end of this week. Vice President Pence warns that politics of “Trump’s populist proteges like Mr. Ramaswamy are a road to ruin for the GOP.” If the government shuts down should voters blame populist Republicans?

Chris Christie (14:30):

Voters should blame everybody who’s in Washington DC. They get sent down there to do the job and they’ve been failing at doing the job for a very long time. And let’s be honest about this with the voters, during the Trump administration, they added $7 trillion, $7 trillion, in national debt, and now the Biden administration has put another $5 trillion on and counting. They have failed and they’re in the spot they’re in now because none of them are willing to tell the truth, none of them are willing to take on the difficult issues, they just want to keep kicking the can down the road. And the inflation that Nikki spoke about is absolutely right and it’s caused by government spending, and that’s why people all across this country are suffering tonight.

(15:11)
And yet we don’t get any answers because Joe Biden hides in his basement and won’t answer as to why he’s raising the debt the way he’s done. And Donald Trump, he hides behind the walls of his golf clubs and won’t show up here to answer questions like all the rest of us are up here to answer. He put $7 trillion on the debt, he should be in this room to answer those questions for the people you talk about who are suffering. And if the government closes and if the government closes, it is to the blame of everyone in Washington DC who has failed to do their job and just plays to the grandstand.

Tim Scott (15:46):

[inaudible 00:15:47]

Ilia Calderón (15:47):

The next question is for Governor DeSantis. Can we please respect the time. Governor DeSantis, you haven’t spoken. Please.

Ron DeSantis (16:02):

The people in Washington are shutting down the American dream with their reckless behavior. They borrowed, they printed, they spent, and now you’re paying more for everything. They are the reason for that. They have shut down our national sovereignty by allowing our border to be wide open. So please spare me the crocodile tears for these people, they need to change what’s going on. And where’s Joe Biden? He’s completely missing in action from leadership and you know who else is missing an action; Donald Trump is missing an action. He should be on this stage tonight. He owes it to you to defend his record where they added $7.8 trillion to the debt, that set the stage for the inflation that we have. Now I can tell you this, as governor of Florida, we cut taxes, we ran surpluses, we’ve paid down over 25% of our state debt and I vetoed wasteful spending when it came to my desk. And as your president, when they send me a bloating spending bill that’s going to cause your prices to go up, I’m going to take out this veto pen and I’m going to send it right back to them.

Vivek Ramaswamy (17:04):

Ilia, you mentioned that you had another question I just want to address that.

Dana Perino (17:07):

I’m going to go to Senator Scott. I have a question that is on the minds of a lot of moms and dads and Americans and I know that you’ve been thinking about it because childcare costs, they are up, they’re topping $10,000 per month.

Tim Scott (17:19):

Yes.

Dana Perino (17:19):

Some families are spending up to half of their income on childcare and they’re having to decide is it worth it for me to work or does it not make sense for me financially? In three days, the billions of dollars in pandemic era funding is going to end and 70,000 daycare’s could close. So you had an effort to broaden eligibility for childcare assistance, that fell apart last year. And for the moms and dads out there who are worried, what can you tell them, if you weren’t able to get it through the Congress how could you do it as president?

Tim Scott (17:51):

Certainly one of the things I did as a member of the Congress was to make sure that we protected the Head Start programs around the country, giving people the opportunity to pick and choose the place that they send their children. The challenges that we see today under the Biden administration is that the cost for daycare has gone over $15,000 per child, and the Build Back Broker Plan, he called it a Build Back Better Plan, it was going up to $29,000. The way we fix that problem is to make sure that we actually cut taxes and give more Americans their money back. When I helped write the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, we actually lowered a single mother’s taxes by 70% on the federal level, for dual income households by 60%. Then we went a step further, we doubled the child tax credit and made it refundable. By doing that, more parents had more resources to make the decisions, how to take care of their family. The one thing we should do is let the American people keep their money. When that happens, the greatest opportunities rise from the ashes.

Dana Perino (19:01):

Vivek, I’m going to give you 15 seconds. Go ahead. And then we’re going to the border.

Vivek Ramaswamy (19:02):

Ilia mischaracterized a part of my view. I think this artificial division is unhelpful in our party. The real divide is not between the Republicans on this stage, and in the Reagan library I want to say these are good people on this stage. The real divide is between the majority of us in this country, who love the United States of America and share our founding ideals, free speech, meritocracy. The idea you get ahead in this country, not in the color of your skin but on the content of your character and the fringe minority in the Democrat party, that has a choke hold over that party, that’s the real divide. So this populist versus classical debate is artificial. We need to unite this party.

Dana Perino (19:41):

We are going to go to immigration and the border. Ilia?

Doug Burgum (19:42):

I actually want to answer the question.

Ilia Calderón (19:42):

We are going to talk about immigration and the border.

Dana Perino (19:45):

No, I think we’re going to go. You have to… We have all these questions. We’re going to get to you, we’re going to come back to you. There’s a lot of time, we’re going…

Doug Burgum (19:46):

I want to answer the question on childcare. You asked the question about childcare and nobody answered the question.

Dana Perino (19:57):

Sir.

Doug Burgum (19:57):

In North Dakota, we knew that the cliff was coming. We knew that there was going to be millions of people without it. And so guess what? We planned.

Dana Perino (20:04):

Okay.

Doug Burgum (20:06):

We passed legislation because childcare-

Dana Perino (20:09):

Sir, We’ll get you some questions but you’re going to have to let us move on. We are going to the border next.

Doug Burgum (20:12):

Childcare is workforce infrastructure.

Ron DeSantis (20:15):

I haven’t been given a chance to respond.

Ilia Calderón (20:16):

In 1984, president Ronald Reagan said the following.

Ronald Reagan (20:22):

The idea of amnesty for those who have put down roots and who have lived here, even though sometime back they may have entered illegally.

Ilia Calderón (20:33):

Two years later, President Reagan granted amnesty to nearly 3 million immigrants, something no Democrat or Republican precedent has done since. Governor Christie, as governor of a non-border state in 2010 you supported a path to citizenship. But when you ran for president in 2016, you flipped, saying immigrants should be tracked like FedEx packages. Where do you stand now on a path to citizenship for 11 million of undocumented immigrants?

Chris Christie (21:06):

Well, the problem is that since no one has done anything since we first had this discussion 13 years ago, we’re not in a position to be able to do any of that anymore. What we have to do now is first treat this like the law enforcement problem it is. Our laws are being broken every day at the southern border, every day. And Joe Biden and his crew is doing nothing about enforcing that law. They are letting it go. And by the way, they announced during the presidential race they were going to let it go.

(21:33)
And we need to have a president who acts like I did as governor; enforce the law, first and foremost. And that means what I’ll do on day one is sign an executive order to send the National Guard to partner with customs and border patrol, to make sure that we stop the flow of fentanyl over the border, but also to make sure that we send a much different message. We want you here in this country to fill the 6 million vacant jobs we have, but only if you come here to follow the law and only if you come here legally. If you come here illegally, we will apprehend you and we will send you back across the border from which you came.

(22:14)
And the fact is, that until we set a law and order agenda in this country, not only now but in the future, we won’t be able to continue this. And I’ll tell you this, Donald Trump failed on this as well. He said he was going to build a wall across the whole border. He built 52 miles of wall and said Mexico would pay for it. Guess what? I think if Mexico knew that he was only going to build 52 miles, they might’ve paid for the 52 miles.

Ilia Calderón (22:38):

Thank you Governor Christie.

Dana Perino (22:39):

All right, Governor Haley.

(22:40)
Most illegal immigrants are coming from countries south of the border. You’ve seen the Fox News drone, it’s captured this steady stream of people coming into the country on a daily basis. In fact, I do believe we have a live picture of it tonight. That is happening right now live. In the last decade, the US has spent nearly $55 billion to address the root causes of migration. But crime, poverty and corruption, they persist, and the number of migrants is only growing. Are we wasting our money?

Nikki Haley (23:09):

Well, what happens is when Joe Biden waved the green flag, it told everybody to come. And now we’ve seen 6 million people cross the border. We’ve had more fentanyl that have killed Americans in the Iraq, Vietnam or Afghanistan wars combined. We need to make sure that we are a country of laws. The second we stop being a country of laws, we give up everything this country was founded on. So we have to secure the border. The way we do that is first of all, defund sanctuary cities. You see what’s happening in Philadelphia right now. It’s got to stop. We need to make sure we put 25,000 more Border Patrol and ICE Agents on the ground and let them do their job. I spent 400 miles down that border and I’m telling you, Border Patrol Agents aren’t allowed to do their job. Let’s go back to “Remain in Mexico” policy. Instead of catch-and-release, let’s go to catch-and-deport and let’s-

Dana Perino (23:58):

What about the aid that federal taxpayers are paying to deal with the root causes? It’s not working or is it?

Nikki Haley (24:03):

The only aid that we should be spending right now is to secure the border; the southern border, the northern border, period.

Dana Perino (24:10):

You would cut off aid to the region?

Nikki Haley (24:11):

We need to keep Americans safe, and right now Americans are not safe. Only when we fix the immigration system, only when we get the border secure should we ever look at putting any more money into this. Our money should be about keeping Americans safe. We’re not doing that, Joe Biden’s not doing that. And you mentioned Congress and shutting down government. I’ll make it clear we have to change the budget process. In 40 years, Congress has only delivered a budget on time four times in 40 years. If they don’t keep the government open, they should not get paid. No pay, no budget. That’s the way we should handle it.

Dana Perino (24:47):

Governor DeSantis-

Doug Burgum (24:47):

The amount of money…

Stuart Varney (24:49):

Governor DeSantis, we have a question for you. Governor DeSantis, China invested $12 billion in Latin America just last year. They signed strategic partnerships with seven countries including Mexico, and China’s military ties to the region now include arm sales and training exercises. Are you comfortable with China deepening ties with our southern neighbors?

Ron DeSantis (25:13):

Of course not. And the reason why we’re in this mess, is because elites in DC for far too long have chosen surrender over strength when it comes to the CCP. Some people in our country got rich, our industrial base got hollowed out and they have been able to build the second most powerful military in the entire world. We need a totally new approach to China. We are going to have real hard power in the Indo-Pacific, like Reagan, to deter their ambitions. We’re going to have economic independence from China where we’re decoupling our economy, and we are going to go after the cultural power they have in this country. As governor of Florida, I banned the CCP from buying land in our state. We should do that all across these United States. We shouldn’t have them in our universities. We shouldn’t have Confucius Institutes. So you see a country in decline, our power’s in decline. China’s going to surpass us this decade, and if they do that, that’s going to affect every single American household. As your president, I am not going to let that happen. I’m going to reverse this country’s decline. We are going to choose strength, not surrender when it comes to the CCP.

Tim Scott (26:18):

America is not a country in decline. Under Joe Biden, we are a country in retreat.

Ilia Calderón (26:24):

Mr. Ramaswamy, you proposed “universal deportation for all undocumented immigrants and their children even if the children are citizens of the United States.” Under what legal premise will you expel US citizens?

Vivek Ramaswamy (26:38):

So the first thing I want to say is I agree with everything, the Republicans on this stage are on the right side of this issue. Militarize the southern border, stop funding sanctuary cities and end foreign aid to Mexico and Central America to end the incentives to come across. But I do go a step further, you’re right about that, Ilia. I favor ending birthright citizenship for the kids of illegal immigrants in this country.

(27:01)
Now the left will howl about the Constitution and the 14th amendment. The difference between me and them is I’ve actually read the 14th amendment. What it says is that all persons born or naturalized in the United States and subject to the laws and jurisdiction thereof, are citizens. So nobody believes that the kid of a Mexican diplomat in this country enjoys birthright citizenship, not a judge or legal scholar in this country will disagree with me on that. Well, if the kid of a Mexican diplomat doesn’t enjoy birthright citizenship, then neither does the kid of an illegal migrant who broke the law to come here. And as the father of two sons, it is hard for me to look them in the eye and say, you have to follow the law when our own government fails to follow its own laws. That’s how we really go the distance and solve this problem and restore the rule of law in the United States of America because that is part of what it even means to be an American.

Ilia Calderón (27:56):

Senator Scott, you opposed ending birthright citizenship. What does Mr. Ramaswamy have wrong on that issue?

Tim Scott (28:02):

Yeah, there’s no doubt the fact that when you think of the Constitution and the 14th Amendment, it was certainly written as it relates to slavery, not as it relates to illegal immigration. It’s been applied to illegal immigration. So the challenge that we face is in fact one that has to do with whether or not the people that come here are under the jurisdiction of our laws. And frankly, if you come here illegally, you are not. Now surviving a Supreme Court argument is something I can’t tell you, but from a perspective of the Constitution, I think it’s simple, that clearly it was designed for slavery and not for illegal immigration.

(28:35)
I’ll go one step further though. When we have a conversation about the things that are happening on this stage, we think about the fact that Vivek just said we were all good people, and I appreciate that because last debate he said we were all bought and paid for. And I thought about that for a little while and said, “I can’t imagine how you could say that knowing that you were just in business with the Chinese Communist Party and the same people that funded Hunter Biden millions of dollars was a partner of yours as well.”

Vivek Ramaswamy (29:03):

That’s nonsense.

Tim Scott (29:05):

That’s not nonsense.

Vivek Ramaswamy (29:05):

So look-

Ilia Calderón (29:05):

Mr Ramaswamy, you have 15 seconds.

Vivek Ramaswamy (29:07):

I want to respond. These are good people who are tainted by a broken system and it’s not the fault of anybody who’s involved.

Tim Scott (29:13):

[inaudible 00:29:14].

Ron DeSantis (29:14):

Some of us aren’t tainted [inaudible 00:29:15]

Vivek Ramaswamy (29:15):

Excuse me, excuse me. Thank you for interrupting while I’m speaking.

Tim Scott (29:19):

No, you said Biden paid for us.

Vivek Ramaswamy (29:20):

If I may.

Tim Scott (29:21):

You can’t be on both sides.

Vivek Ramaswamy (29:24):

Gentlemen, you’ll have your turn.

Tim Scott (29:25):

One of the challenges we should at least-

Ron DeSantis (29:26):

[inaudible 00:29:26] back and forth. Can we please focus on the issues that matter? [inaudible 00:29:30] big business in China, everybody knows that.

Vivek Ramaswamy (29:32):

If I may address.

Ron DeSantis (29:33):

Let’s focus on holding Joe Biden accountable. That’s what we need to be focusing on.

Vivek Ramaswamy (29:36):

I actually agree with Ron DeSantis.

Ilia Calderón (29:38):

With everybody speaking at the same time, no one can understand your message.

Vivek Ramaswamy (29:41):

Exactly. So if I may. I agree with Ron DeSantis on China. When every other CEO expanded into the Chinese market, you know what I did with my first company? We opened a subsidiary in China. But you know what I did that was different than every other company, we got the hell out of there. And when I started my next company Strive…

Nikki Haley (29:59):

Yeah, right before you ran for president.

Tim Scott (29:59):

2023. 2023.

Vivek Ramaswamy (29:59):

… right when I started my next company Strive to compete against BlackRock…

Tim Scott (30:02):

It’s a debate-

Vivek Ramaswamy (30:03):

Excuse me.

Tim Scott (30:03):

No, no. It’s a debate between you and you.

Vivek Ramaswamy (30:05):

… to compete against BlackRock, I made a commitment that we would never do business in China. And I will say something-

Ilia Calderón (30:09):

Mr Ramaswamy, I think you’ve had more than time to explain your point.

Vivek Ramaswamy (30:12):

Well, I was interrupted by a lot of people here and I want to be respectful because I believe these people.

Tim Scott (30:16):

You were respectful last debate.

Vivek Ramaswamy (30:17):

But I do not believe in these… we’re sitting here in the Reagan library.

Tim Scott (30:20):

Yes. I wish you would [inaudible 00:30:22]

Vivek Ramaswamy (30:21):

And in honor of Ronald Reagan’s library, if I may. Tim from one admirer of Ronald Reagan to another. From one admire of Reagan to another.

Tim Scott (30:29):

Did you not do deals with the CCP four years ago?

Vivek Ramaswamy (30:30):

[inaudible 00:30:32].

Ron DeSantis (30:32):

This isn’t productive. Nobody can understand what’s going on.

Vivek Ramaswamy (30:34):

Let’s have a policy debate. Let us have a policy debate and I will see that through.

Ilia Calderón (30:42):

Mr Ramaswamy, I have a question for Vice President Pence. Thank you very much. Vice President Pence. In 2017, the Trump/Pence administration canceled DACA, which put the legal status of 600,000 dreamers in the hands of the courts. Dreamers work

Ilia Calderón (31:00):

… and they pay taxes. As President, if the Supreme Court ends DACA, would you work with Congress to reach a permanent solution for Dreamers?

Mike Pence (31:10):

Well, first, let me say I’m glad Vivek pulled out of his business deal in 2018 in China. That must’ve been about the time you decided to start voting in Presidential elections.

Vivek Ramaswamy (31:19):

Thank you. I’m going to address that in a second too.

Mike Pence (31:21):

Nice to have you participating in elections. So let me speak to this issue, number one, I negotiated the Remain In Mexico Policy with the Mexican government. We used economic power to bring the Mexican government to the table. We built hundreds of miles of border wall and, despite what’s said here today, we reduced illegal immigration and asylum abuse by 90%. And as President of the United States, I can do it again. And the truth is we need to fix a broken immigration system, and I’ll do that as well, but, first and foremost, a nation without borders is not a nation. We have to secure the southern border of the United States of America. I know how to do it and we will do it again. Let me say one other thing about China.

Ilia Calderón (32:07):

Vice President.

Mike Pence (32:08):

Let me say one other thing about China.

Ilia Calderón (32:09):

Would you negotiate with Congress to give a solution to the problem that Dreamers have right now? They are in limbo.

Mike Pence (32:16):

Well, let me tell you, I served in Congress for 12 years, although it seemed longer, but something I’ve done different than everybody on this stage is I’ve actually secured reform in Congress. Ron, you talk a really good game about cutting spending, but you’ve increased spending in Florida by 30%. When I was a member of Congress in 2006, right after Hurricane Katrina, Dana, you remember it, we stood our ground. I led House Conservatives. We cut $100 billion dollars out of the federal budget. It can be done, but as I said in the last debate, I’ll say again, this is no time for on the job training. I’m going to be ready on day one to get Congress to step up, secure the southern border of the United States, build a military fitted to our times, and we’re going to get spending in Washington D.C. under control once and for all.

Ilia Calderón (33:10):

Thank you, Vice President. [inaudible 00:33:12].

Stuart Varney (33:11):

On the other side of this break and I propose to go to a break, how will these candidates make America safer as rising crime plagues our cities? Debate Night continues in moments.

Speaker 2 (33:32):

Do you trust our government and where the economy is heading? Does the thought of losing your hard-earned retirement savings to D.C.’s reckless spending scare the heck out of you? Well, you’re not alone. Smart Americans are taking action while they still can by reaching out to Birch Gold Group. For over 20 years, Birch Gold has helped concerned Americans protect their futures by moving part of an existing IRA or 401K into a physical gold IRA. Because when things are a mess, like right now, Americans turn to gold. With an A-Plus Rating with the Better Business Bureau and thousands of happy customers, Birch Gold is the trusted leader in gold. They’re busier than ever because people are taking control of their savings away from the government and into their own hands. Text the word “Now” to the number 989898 to get a free Info Kit on Gold. There’s no pressure and no obligation, just information. So get your no-cost Info Kit now. Text “Now” to 989898.

Speaker 3 (35:12):

I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of America and to the Republic for which it stands.

Speaker 3 (35:20):

You’re looking at the World Trade Center. We understand that a plane…

Speaker 4 (35:29):

You can see the fireman assembled here.

Speaker 5 (35:29):

[inaudible 00:35:30] huge ball of fire.

Speaker 6 (35:29):

At this point, it’s clearly difficult to tell. [inaudible 00:35:34].

Speaker 3 (35:29):

… of one nation under God. [inaudible 00:35:50].

Speaker 7 (36:48):

We all like free stuff, especially free trips. Text “Tickets” to 80810 to enter to win two free tickets to a future debate. Plus, we’ll throw in free airfare and hotel, two debate tickets, airfare and hotel, all free. Text 80810 to enter to win today.

Dana Perino (37:28):

And welcome back to the Reagan Library for the second Republican Presidential Debate. I do want to just remind everyone, there’s one minute for questions, 30 seconds for a follow-up, and the more you mention each other, that means the fewer questions you’re going to get. Okay, so we want to talk about crime. This has been a horrendous problem in our country. Fox News and others have been covering it. Governor Christie, crime in major cities is striking fear into the hearts of Americans. Just last night, looters took over the streets of Philadelphia. You said in the last debate that you would use U.S. attorneys to prosecute crimes local prosecutors won’t, but they are stretched as well and they could not handle all of the lawlessness, the shoplifting, all the carjackings, the armed robberies. They’re all surging. Progressive prosecutors were elected by their constituents and they can’t be fired by a President. So what would you do to end the revolving door of criminality?

Chris Christie (38:19):

Well, look, Dana, I’m the only one on this stage who’s done it. For seven years, I ran the fifth-largest office in this country at the U.S. Attorney’s Office in New Jersey, and we set records for the number of prosecutions that we brought that still have not been broken. And the reason was that we went after the crime that was affecting people’s lives. And as President, I will point an Attorney General and instruct that Attorney General that you are to put all the resources that are necessary to bring our cities back under control. The fact is they will be stretched, there’s no doubt about that, but that’s what they take the job for, because they love the idea of enforcing the law. We’ve got to bring law and order back to this country and not just in our cities, but we need law and order back everywhere.

(39:01)
We need law and order back in our suburbs. People are threatened there. We need it in our rural areas. People feel threatened there. And we need it in Washington, D.C also. And Donald Trump should be here to answer for that, but he’s not. And I want to look in that camera right now and tell you, Donald, I know you’re watching, you can’t help yourself. I know you’re watching and you’re not here tonight not because of polls and not because of your indictments. You’re not here tonight because you’re afraid of being on this stage and defending your record. You’re ducking these things. And let me tell you what’s going to happen. You keep doing that, no one up here is going to call you Donald Trump anymore. We’re going to call you Donald Duck.

Dana Perino (39:36):

All right, I want to ask Governor DeSantis, you fired a couple of prosecutors in your state, but as President, you would not have the ability to do that. How do you think about dealing with the root causes of crime, especially this revolving door of the criminals that just get out and come back and commit another crime?

Ron DeSantis (39:55):

Well, the crime in these cities is one of the strongest signs of the decaying of America. We can’t be successful as a country if people aren’t even safe to live in places like Los Angeles and San Francisco. Just being in Southern California over the last couple of days, my wife and I have met three people who have been mugged on the street, and that would’ve never happened 10 or 20 years ago. In Florida, we back the blue. We support the men and women of law enforcement. They are keeping us safe. We have a 50-year low in the crime rate. And, yes, when I had two progressive prosecutors that weren’t following the law in Florida, I removed them from their post and the people of Florida are safer as a result of it.

(40:35)
As President, I will use the Justice Department to bring civil rights cases against all of those left-wing Soros funded prosecutors. We’re not going to let them get away with it anymore. We want to reverse this country’s decline, we need to choose law and order over rioting and disorder.

Stuart Varney (40:52):

On a related subject, Governor Haley, there’s a nationwide policing shortage, retirements are up, recruitment is in the tank, morale is at a record low. Three years ago, you signed a pledge to support law enforcement. Now, pledges are a nice idea, but what’s your actual plan to get more police on our streets?

Nikki Haley (41:15):

And I actually did it in South Carolina too. What we knew in South Carolina was, you take care of those who take care of you. We have to start taking care of law enforcement, but it’s not just taking care of them with words. It’s making sure that you also follow through on what they do. Right now, we have a lot of stolen guns on the street. Well, these law enforcement officers, they arrest these people and then they go and they’re let out the very next day so law enforcement feels like no one has their back. We have to start prosecuting according to the law. We have to make sure we have the backs of law enforcement and we have to make sure that we’re a country of law and order.

(41:47)
But I want to go back to China because I don’t think we spent enough time on that. Right now, we have to look at what government’s doing to hurt us against China too. You have a company, USAntibiotics, that produces Amoxicillin, the number one antibiotic that we need, and right now there is a company in Bristol, Tennessee that produces that yet our federal government only gets it from China. We need to be focusing on companies that produce in America and supporting those companies that produce in America, not companies that are helping China.

Stuart Varney (42:18):

Governor, we’ll be talking foreign policy later. Ilia.

Ilia Calderón (42:22):

Thank you, Stuart. We’re going to stay on the topic of crime because it affects all of us. Governor Burgum, for the first time ever, a Univision poll found that mass shootings and gun safety are one of the most important issues for Latino voters. Mental health concerns are not unique to the United States, but gun violence is. What is your specific plan to curb gun violence?

Doug Burgum (42:52):

Well, first, we need to know and understand is I think that the liberal left seems to be just completely bent on prosecuting law-abiding citizens that are gun owners because every solution they have to this is take away the Second Amendment rights of Americans and somehow that’s going to solve the problem. But all these cities that we’re talking about that they showed the videos of tonight, they have some of the strictest gun laws in the country. So we know that that’s not what’s working. What we have to do is get back to the core issues about the family. We have to get back to behavioral health and mental health. We’ve got to get back to actually enforcing the laws these people talked about and, like we’ve done in North Dakota, where we’ve got the goal and we’re on the track to being the most military friendly state in the nation.

(43:31)
We’ve got the most military and the most support of what we’re doing in terms of law enforcement because the morale is down because we’ve been defunding the police, because they’ve been attacked in the press. The police have become the bad guys. There’s all these jobs available in America. Why would you be a policeman if people don’t even respect them? Every time I see a policeman, the first thing I say is thank you, and so does everybody else in my family and most of the people in our state, because they know we have to respect the people that are out there defending us every single day.

Speaker 8 (43:59):

Can I answer the question on mass shootings?

Ilia Calderón (44:00):

Mr. Ramaswamy, according to Customs and Border Protection, about 90% of fentanyl is seized at official border crossings and 57% of the smugglers are U.S. citizens. How would you stop fentanyl brought into the country mostly by U.S. citizens through ports of entry?

Vivek Ramaswamy (44:20):

There’s two sides to this, so we have to be very honest about it. One is we do have to seal that southern border. Building the wall is not enough. They’re building cartel financed tunnels underneath that wall. Semi-trucks can drive through them. We have to use our own military to seal the Swiss cheese of a southern border. But we also have to be honest, there’s a demand side problem in this country too, a mental health epidemic. I met a family in Iowa, two parents, Kathy and Derek. They lost their son, Sebastian, 17 years old. He bought Percocet on Snapchat and then he died. Why did he die? Because it was laced with fentanyl That is closer to bio-terrorism, not a drug overdose. That is poisoning. It is our job to make sure that never happens, but it’s also our job to make sure that 17 year olds don’t turn to Percocet via Snapchat.

(45:09)
We have to bring back mental healthcare in this country. Not with pumping pharmaceuticals but with faith-based approaches that restore purpose and meaning in the next generation of Americans. Many of them are getting it through social media, and this isn’t a Republican point or a Democrat point, but if you’re 16 years old or under, you should not be using an addictive social media product period. This is something that we can both agree on and we can revive both the mental health of this country while stopping the fentanyl epidemic that will kill more people this year than who died on 9/11. And I refuse to be a passive bystander sitting in the White House like the hollowed husk of a current President we have. We will step up and address this problem to stand for Americans and our children.

Dana Perino (45:53):

I want to go to Vice President Pence next.

Nikki Haley (45:58):

Why are you encouraging TikTok? Quit encouraging TikTok.

Ron DeSantis (45:58):

Everything he said I agree with. That is why as Commander-in-Chief, I’m going to use the U.S. military to go after the Mexican drug cartels. They are killing our people, and the stories that I’ve seen. In Florida, we had an infant, 18 months, parents rented an Airbnb, and apparently the people that had rented it before were using drugs. The infant was crawling, the toddler was crawling on the carpet and ingested fentanyl residue and died. Are we just going to sit here and let this happen, this carnage happen in our country? I am not going to do that. So I guarantee you on day one this border is going to be a day one issue for me as President. We’re going to declare it a national emergency. Yes, we’ll build the wall. We’ll do Remain In Mexico, but those Mexican drug cartels are going to be treated like the foreign terrorist organizations that they are.

Dana Perino (46:43):

I’m going to go to Vice President Pence. [inaudible 00:46:43] All right, Vice President Pence. We’re going to move on to a different issue. Hold on. Sorry. Vice President Pence.

Chris Christie (46:51):

$5 billion.

Dana Perino (46:51):

Just last month, Vice President Pence, you said if elected you would repeal all Obamacare mandates. However, you also made that same promise in 2016, and at that time, Trump-Pence had congressional majorities for at least the first two years and you did not deliver on that promise. So Obamacare right now, it is more popular than ever. Why should Americans trust you if you become President to fix that or is Obamacare here to stay?

Mike Pence (47:20):

Well, first, let me speak to the mass shootings issue and then I’ll answer that question. It’s important one, Dana. Look, I’m someone that believes that justice delayed is justice denied and as a father of three, as the grandfather of three beautiful little girls, I am sick and tired of these mass shootings happening in the United States of America. And if I’m President of the United States, I’m going to go to the Congress of the United States and we’re going to pass a federal expedited death penalty for anyone involved in a mass shooting so that they will meet their fate in months, not years. It is unconscionable that the Parkland shooter, Ron, is actually going to spend the rest of his life behind bars in Florida. That’s not justice. We have to mete out justice and send a message to these would be killers that you are not going to live out your days behind bars.

Dana Perino (48:17):

I appreciate that.

Mike Pence (48:18):

You’re going to meet justice in this system.

Dana Perino (48:19):

But does that mean Obamacare is here to stay?

Mike Pence (48:27):

Well, thank you for reiterating the question because I’d love to answer it.

Dana Perino (48:30):

You got 30 seconds.

Mike Pence (48:30):

Look, I think it’s one of the choices here. My former running mate, Donald Trump, actually has a plan to start to consolidate more power in Washington, D.C., consolidate more power in the executive branch. If I’m President of the United States, it’s my intention to make the federal government smaller by returning to the states those resources and programs that are rightfully theirs under the 10th amendment of the Constitution. That means all Obamacare funding, all housing funding, all HHS funding. All of it goes back to the states. We’ll shut down the Federal Department of Education will allow states to innovate. We’re going to revive federalism in America and states are going to help bring America back.

Dana Perino (49:15):

I’m not sure we got an answer on Obamacare’s state, but, Stu, go ahead. May

Stuart Varney (49:16):

I remind everyone to keep within their timeframe so that we can get as many questions in as possible. This question for Governor DeSantis, over 26 million Americans don’t have insurance coverage. Governor DeSantis, two and a half million of them are in your state. That’s worse than the national average. Can Americans trust you on this?

Ron DeSantis (49:38):

Well, I think this is a symptom of our overall economic decline. Everything has gotten more expensive. You see insurance rates are going through the roof. People that are going to get groceries, I spoke with a woman in Iowa and she said for the first time in my life I’m having to take things out of my grocery cart when I get to the checkout line because the total goes up so quickly. This is very real and people are hurting out there so we’ve got to address the underlying problem with Bidenomics, the overspending, taking all Biden’s rules and regulations, I’m going to throw them in the trash can on day one. You’re not going to have to worry about that. We’re going to open up all of our energy. We will be energy dominant in this country that will lower your gas prices. And what we need to do with healthcare is recognize our healthcare is putting patients at the back of the bus. We have big pharma, big insurance, and big government and we need to tackle that and have more power for the people and the doctor-patient relationship.

Stuart Varney (50:35):

Governor, why is your record in Florida on insurance worse than the national average?

Ron DeSantis (50:41):

Our state’s a dynamic state. We’ve got a lot of folks that come. Of course, we’ve had a population boom. We also don’t have a lot of welfare benefits in Florida. We’re basically saying, “This is a field of dreams, you can do well in the state, but we’re not going to be like California and have massive numbers of people on government programs without work requirements.” We believe you work and you got to do that. And so that goes for all the welfare benefits. And you know what that’s done, Stuart? Our unemployment rate is the lowest amongst any big state, we have the highest GDP growth against any big state, and even CNBC, no fan of mine, ranked Florida the number one economy in America.

Nikki Haley (51:19):

But you have one of the worst cases [inaudible 00:51:20].

Ilia Calderón (51:26):

On the topic of healthcare, Governor Haley, healthcare is the leading cause of bankruptcy for American families, accounting for two-thirds of all personal bankruptcies. As President, how will you protect Americans who get sick from financial ruin?

Nikki Haley (51:40):

First of all, how can we be the best country in the world and have the most expensive healthcare in the world? We have an issue. My mom was in the hospital, and when she was in the hospital, they tried to bring her a couple of Tylenol and she said, “I don’t need it.” And they said, “Honey, go ahead and take it because paying for it anyway.” Why is it that when we got the bill, the insurance company and the hospital negotiated the bill for her without her having anything to do with it? When I am President, we will break all of it. From the insurance company to the hospitals, to the doctor’s offices, to the PBMs, to the pharmaceutical companies, we will make it all transparent because when you do that you will realize that’s what the problem is.

(52:16)
Second thing is you’ve got to deal with tort law. The doctors don’t give you the 10 tests because they want to. It’s because of the 90% chance they’ll get sued. And then we need to bring competition back to healthcare, get rid of certificate of need systems, and make sure that they can compete. We have to put the patient in the driver’s seat. They’ve been in the backseat for way too long. And once we give the patient the ability to decide their healthcare, deciding which plan they want, that is when we will see magic happen. But we’re going to have to make every part of the industry open up and show us where their warts are, because they all have them and we need to fix this on behalf of the American people.

Dana Perino (52:55):

Governor Burgum, do you have a better way in 30 seconds?

Doug Burgum (52:57):

Well, yes. We’re not talking about the real problem ever. We talk about, why do we have the most expensive healthcare in the world? It’s because the federal government got involved the same way they did with EVs and they said, “We’re going to subsidize a particular kind of software,” back in 2008 under Obama, and they said, “Hey, we’re going to do this. It’s going to make everything more productive.” All of you that are watching have been to a doctor’s office when the doctors got his back to you and their hands on a keyboard. The only industry in the world that’s ever absorbed $1 trillion of IT and became less productive. They saw less patients per day in U.S. healthcare because they were subsidizing a certain kind of technology. It wasn’t about improving healthcare. It was about picking winners and losers. Every time the federal government’s involved, whether it’s higher education, healthcare, or now the auto industry, things get more expensive and less competitive.

Dana Perino (53:43):

That was a great transition because we are going to move on, the future of education in America. What’s the government’s role in finding a way forward? The second Republican Debate rolls on from Simi Valley.

Ronald Reagan (54:00):

An informed patriotism is what we want, and are we’re doing a good enough job teaching our children what America is and what she represents in the long history of the world?

Speaker 2 (54:14):

Do you trust our government and where the economy is heading? Does the thought of losing your hard-earned retirement savings to D.C.’s reckless spending scare the heck out of you? Well, you’re not alone. Smart Americans are taking action while they still can by reaching out to Birch Gold Group. For over 20 years, Birch Gold has helped concerned Americans protect their futures by moving part of an existing IRA or 401K into a physical gold IRA. Because when things are a mess, like right now, Americans turn to gold. With an A-Plus Rating with the Better Business Bureau and thousands of happy customers, Birch Gold is the trusted leader in gold. They’re busier than ever because people are taking control of their savings away from the government and into their own hands. Text the word “Now” to the number 989898 to get a free Info Kit on Gold. There’s no pressure and no obligation, just information. So get your no-cost Info Kit now. Text “Now” to 989898.

Speaker 9 (55:14):

Hey, YouTube. What are you doing?

Speaker 10 (55:15):

Oh, I’m updating my content policies.

Speaker 9 (55:18):

Really? Do you mind if I take a look?

Speaker 10 (55:20):

Sure. Yeah. Here you go. Oh wait, one more. This is a new one.

Speaker 9 (55:30):

Thank you. I’ll block off my schedule.

Speaker 10 (55:31):

It’s a real page turner. Page 94 is my personal favorite.

Speaker 9 (55:35):

Okay. Can’t wait. Honestly, YouTube, this is too much to read.

Speaker 10 (55:41):

Ah!

Ronna McDaniel (55:44):

When Republicans vote early, we win.

Mike Pence (55:46):

You could bank your vote by casting your ballot before Election Day.

Kevin McCarthy (55:50):

We don’t need to wait until the last quarter to put points on the board.

Donald Trump (55:54):

Go to bankyourvote.com to sign up and commit to voting early.

Sen. Bill Hagerty (55:59):

That’s how we’re going to beat the Democrats at their own game.

Rep. Byron Donalds (56:01):

Go to bankyourvote.com

Sen. Ted Cruz (56:01):

And please take the pledge to bank your vote to beat Biden.

Kevin Sorbo (56:09):

Do you owe over $10,000 in back taxes? Kevin Sorbo here with an important message. The Biden administration has proposed an $80 billion plan to boost IRS collections. This means they could garnish your wages, levy your bank account, and even seize your property. Tax Network USA, a trusted tax firm, can help protect your income and assets today while quickly settling your tax debt. But you have to act now while you still have options. Call Tax Network USA today.

Speaker 11 (56:44):

Hey there, stop changing channels. I’m out here in the woods and you got to see this. It’s the new Patriot Power Generator 2000X, a solar generator worth its weight in gold when your power goes out. With double the capacity and expandable so you can run your fridge even longer, it’s fume free, safe to use inside, and never needs gas ever. Plus, you’ll get this solar panel free. Go to 4patriots.com and do it now. Get your solar generator with free shipping and free panel at 4patriots.com.

Speaker 2 (57:44):

Does the thought of losing your hard-earned retirement savings to D.C.’s reckless spending scare the heck out of you? Smart Americans are taking action by texting the word “Now” to 989898 for a free Info Kit on Gold from Birch Gold Group. For 20 years, Birch Gold has helped concerned Americans protect their future by moving part of an existing IRA or 401K into a physical gold IRA. Text “Now” to 989898 now for our free Info Kit.

Dana Perino (58:55):

And we are back live at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in the Air Force One Pavilion for the second Republican Debate. And let’s get back to our questions. Governor Haley, American students, they are in academic trouble. They have lower scores in math and reading. There’s chronic absenteeism. That’s at record highs. And this has even been called education homicide. You say school choice is the answer, but South Carolina, your home state still has not enacted universal school choice and even the current expansion won’t be fully implemented until 2027. Parents can’t wait four years for a fix. So what would you do right now?

Nikki Haley (59:33):

Well, school choice isn’t the only answer, but I’ll tell you, it’s not out of a lack of trying that we didn’t try and get school choice in South Carolina. What I’ll tell you, first of all, is we have to acknowledge the fact that 67% of our eighth graders are not proficient in reading or math. Over 80% of our eighth graders aren’t proficient in history or civics. And recently they came out and said our 12 and 13 year olds are scoring at the lowest levels they’ve been scoring in reading and math in decades. So the first thing we’ve got to do is we’ve got to make sure we catch our kids back up. We have to make sure they can read. A child that can’t read by third grade is four times less likely to graduate high school. We need to do reading remediation. We need complete transparency in the classroom.

(01:00:13)
No parent should ever wonder what’s being said or taught to their child in the classroom. We need to make sure that we have school choice so that there’s competition. We need to move all the programs from the federal government down to the states and let states decide what education looks like in their states. And we need to start building things in America again. Let’s put vocational classes back in our high schools and let’s get our kids building the things that we know that we can make. When we start to focus on that and really bring in that parental involvement, that’s when we’ll start to see a difference.

(01:00:42)
But we’ve got to get parents back included. We’ve got to quit spending time on this DEI and CRT and instead focus on financial literacy, on digital literacy, and on making sure that our kids know what they need to do to have the jobs of the next generation.

Stuart Varney (01:00:58):

On the subjective education, a question for Governor Christie. Students in your state are getting high marks on their report cards, but minorities are not doing well with math and reading. Black and Hispanic students averaging 29 points lower than white students in New Jersey. Would you address minorities first?

Chris Christie (01:01:21):

Well, you have to address all students and, look, in our state, Stuart, frankly, before I was Governor, that gap was close to 50%. And what we did was institute more charter schools and more renaissance schools and more public school choice in New Jersey with innovative solutions in cities like Camden, where now we took what was the worst school district in America during my time and we have now increased that by nearly 40% in terms of their proficiency. It can be done when you give people choice. But let’s tell the truth to everybody about what this is. This public school system is no longer run by

Chris Christie (01:02:00):

… by the public. It is run by the teachers’ unions in this country. Randi Weingarten and her crew are absolutely strangling. They’re taking the worst of their members and defending them, rather than advocating for our kids. And when you have the President of the United States sleeping with a member of the teachers’ union, there is no chance that you could take the stranglehold away from the teachers’ union every day. They have an advocate inside the White House every day for the worst of their teachers, not for our students to be the best they can be. A President of the United States is to take on the teachers’ union, I did it in New Jersey and I will do it as President of the United States.

Ilia Calderón (01:02:43):

Governor DeSantis, I have a question for you. Governor DeSantis, I have a question for you.

Tim Scott (01:02:45):

I haven’t started. Are you guys having trouble seeing [inaudible 01:02:47]?

Ilia Calderón (01:02:46):

Florida’s new Black history curriculum says “Slaves develop skills, which in some instances, could be applied for their personal benefit”. You have said, “Slaves develop skills in spite of slavery, not because of it.” But many are still hurt. For the sentence of slaves, this is personal. What is your message to them?

Ron DeSantis (01:03:08):

So, first of all, that’s a hoax that was perpetrated by Kamala Harris. We are not going to be doing that-

Tim Scott (01:03:13):

Take the line out, just take the line out.

Ron DeSantis (01:03:14):

Second of all, that was written by descendants of slaves. These are great Black history scholars, so we need to stop playing these games. Here’s the deal. Our country’s education system is in decline, because it’s focused on indoctrination, denying parents’ rights. Florida represents the revival of American education. We’re ranked number one in the nation in education, by US News and World Report. My wife and I, we have a six, five and three-year-old. This is personal to us.

(01:03:38)
We didn’t just talk about universal school choice, we enacted universal school choice. We didn’t just talk about Parents’ Bill of Rights, we enacted the Parents’ Bill of Rights. We eliminated critical race theory, and we now have American Civics and the Constitution in our schools in a really big way, just like President Reagan asked for, in his farewell addressed back in 1989. Florida is showing how it’s done. We’re standing with parents, and our kids are benefiting.

Ilia Calderón (01:04:04):

Senator Scott, you’re opposed to these new standards. What is your message for Governor DeSantis?

Tim Scott (01:04:14):

There is not a redeeming quality in slavery. He and Kamala should have just taken the one sentence out. America has suffered because of slavery, but we’ve overcome that. We are the greatest nation on earth because we faced our demons in the mirror and made a decision. So often, we think that all the issues, you talk about crime and education and healthcare, we always think that those issues go back to slavery.

(01:04:42)
Here’s the challenge though. Black families survived slavery. We survived poll taxes and literacy tests. We survived discrimination being woven into the laws of our country. What was hard to survive was Johnson’s great society where they decided to put money, where they decided to take the Black father out of the household to get a check in the mail. And you can now measure that in unemployment and crime and devastation.

(01:05:14)
If you want to restore hope, you’ve got to restore the family, restore capitalism, and put Americans back at work, together as one American family. Our nation continues to go in the right direction. It’s why I can say I have been discriminated against, but America is not a racist country. Never ever doubt who we are. We are the greatest country on God’s green earth, and frankly, the city on the hill needs a brand new leader. And I’m asking for your vote.

Dana Perino (01:05:46):

I’m going to have a question for you, Mr. Ramaswamy. Over 10.7 million students in over 18,000 public schools nationwide have the ability to change their identity without parental notification. Governor Christie told Stewart last week that he would pass a federal law to protect parental rights. Would you try to do the same?

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:06:07):

I have to be very clear about this. Transgenderism, especially in kids, is a mental health disorder. We have to acknowledge the truth of that for what it is. I met two young women early in this campaign-

Dana Perino (01:06:19):

But specifically on parental rights in schools.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:06:21):

Parents have the right to know. And you know what the hypocrisy of this is? Even New Hampshire failed to actually get past a piece of legislation here. The very people who say that this increases the risk of suicide are also the ones saying that parents don’t have the right to know about that increased risk of suicide. And I’m sorry, it is not compassionate to affirm a kid’s confusion. That is not compassion, that is cruelty. I met two young women, Chloe and Katie early in this campaign, who are in their 20s, now regret getting double mastectomies and a hysterectomy. One of them will never have children. And the fact that we allowed that to happen in this country is barbaric. So, I will ban genital mutilation or chemical castration-

Dana Perino (01:07:03):

Okay. But I want to know, just specifically-

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:07:04):

Under [inaudible 01:07:04], parents have absolutely the right-

Dana Perino (01:07:06):

Would you try to pass a federal law that says parents should have that right?

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:07:09):

We are going to require, states absolutely have to follow that through. We stand for parental rights, yes.

Dana Perino (01:07:15):

Okay. Then I want to ask Governor Burgum just to follow up on this, parental, because in your state you do not have a law that says parents can’t be notified, but you want to be president. Would you try to pass a federal law to say parents have that right?

Doug Burgum (01:07:25):

I think this is a state’s issue, but I do want to say something, because all night long we’ve been talking about issues about how it’s broken in Washington and I respect all of the people on the stage here for their a 100 plus years of public service, thank you. But the reason why we’re not talking about education or healthcare or safety being a problem in North Dakota is because we have a business leader. I’ve got more experience as a business leader than I think this whole group combined. I know I’ve created more jobs than everybody else on stage, thousands of high paying jobs that have real meaning. So as a business leader, you come in and you treat the taxpayer like a customer. So in North Dakota, instead of fighting with the teachers’ unions, we actually created a K12 coordinating council. Everybody gets in the room and the customer is the student.

Dana Perino (01:08:03):

But you do understand that this is an issue that many people in America really are concerned about, worried about, about parents and notification and schools.

Doug Burgum (01:08:12):

Yes, and that’s why we have fifty platforms of innovation. That’s why we have states. There are certain things the federal government is supposed to do. It’s not the Department of Education, that needs to be assembled, we got to move it back to states. Do what we did in North Dakota instead of like, “Oh, here’s a choice school and here’s an old school, the old way with the teacher’s union, the kids are trapped.” We made every school in North Dakota an innovation school, every school got out from under the red tape and the things that help teach the values that we’re trying to get like 4H, like FFA, like voice [inaudible 01:08:40], they can credit for all of that stuff.

Dana Perino (01:08:41):

I love the 4H, but we’re going to move on.

Ilia Calderón (01:08:41):

Vice President Pence, I have a question for you.

Doug Burgum (01:08:42):

And by the way, North Dakota is now at the top of the median SAT scores in the country, right now.

Ilia Calderón (01:08:48):

Vice President Pence, the Department of Homeland Security warns that violence against LGBTQ+ people is on the rise and intensifying. According to a recent study, members of that community are nine times more likely to be victims of violent hate crimes. As president, how would you protect this community from violent attacks and discrimination?

Mike Pence (01:09:11):

Well, as president of the United States, I’ll stand up for the safety and the civil liberties of every America, from every background, and I want the American people to know that. But I want to answer the question as well, Dana, that you just asked Doug Burgum, because by way of full disclosure, Chris, you mentioned the president’s situation. My wife isn’t a member of the teachers’ union, but I got to admit, I’ve been sleeping with a teacher for 38 years. And full disclosure. Look, education is a state and local function. State of Indiana had one of the very first school choice programs in the country, and when I was governor of the State of Indiana, we doubled it.

(01:09:52)
And as to your question, Dana, let’s be very, very clear. When the Linn-Mar community schools in Iowa had a policy where you had to have a permission slip from your parents to get a Tylenol, but you could get a gender transition plan without notifying your parents, I weighed in with a foundation. That’s not bad policy. That’s crazy. We’re going to stand up for the rights of parents and we’re going to pass a federal ban on transgender chemical or surgical surgery anywhere in the country. We’ve got to protect our kids from this radical gender ideology agenda. And we’ve got to empower parents at the state level with the ability to choose where the kids go to school, whether it’s public, private, parochial, or homeschool. You empower parents, and our schools will straighten up and reflect our values and focus on the basics faster than you could possibly imagine.

Stuart Varney (01:10:48):

Next subject, China.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:10:50):

Can I just say one thing-

Stuart Varney (01:10:51):

China, China, China. China is investing… If you talk over everybody, we lose time. China is investing heavily in their tech companies, 280 billion every year on semiconductor research and development. That is one chips act per year. Governor DeSantis, you say companies like Google and Meta have too much power. Doesn’t going after them give China an edge?

Ron DeSantis (01:11:20):

No, I think you look at how our societies develop. They have huge amount of power over our society. They’ve cracked down on free speech. We’re not saying you don’t want them to do business, but you want it to be a free market. And right now they’re monopolies. But this issue of China, I think, is really going to be fundamental. We have subcontracted out so much of our national needs to the CCP. We rely on them for a whole host of issues. We need to reshore and we need to decouple all those important industries. We need to get that back in the United States. They are our top geopolitical adversary by a country mile. Xi Jinping’s got huge ambitions not only in the Asia Pacific, but as you mentioned earlier, in our region. But ultimately we’ve got to beat them on the economy. And so that’s what we’ll do as President of the United States.

Dana Perino (01:12:07):

Governor Christie, I wanted to follow up on this, because 22% of American workers fear their jobs will be lost to a robot. And you said in the past that the free market is the way to go. Would you retrain workers who lose a job to artificial intelligence, and to do what?

Chris Christie (01:12:26):

Well, look, what I think artificial intelligence offers us is an extraordinary opportunity to expand well beyond the productivity that we have now, and to have Americans be able to be involved in that revolution, Dana. Each time we have shown incredible innovation and progress in this country, what we’ve done with it is to expand all kinds of new even unthought of opportunities for folks. Yes, we have to do retraining for folks who lose some of their jobs, and we should be doing that and we should have more training available both at the county college level and the local level for people to be able to access it.

(01:13:01)
So yes, I would be in favor of that, but this is a much bigger issue than that. We can’t be afraid of innovation. America has been the great innovator of this world over the last 250 years. A technological innovator, a manufacturing innovator, and a freedom and governmental innovator. And that’s why America has to continue to stand strong in the world, pro-innovation, pro progress. And I will tell you this, as President of the United States, what I will do is to make sure that every innovator in this country gets the government the hell off its back and out of its pocket, so that it can innovate and bring great new inventions to our country that will make everybody’s lives better.

Stuart Varney (01:13:42):

Mr Ramaswamy, TikTok is banned on government-issued devices because of its ties to the Chinese government. Yet you joined TikTok at the dinner with Boxer and influencer Jake Paul. Should the commander in chief be so easily persuaded by an influencer?

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:14:04):

So the answer is, I have a radical idea for the Republican Party. We need to win elections. And part of how we win elections is reaching the next generation of young Americans where they are. So when I get into office, I’ve been very clear. Kids under the age of social, under the age of 16, should not be using addictive social media. We’re only going to ever get to declaring independence from China, which I favor, if we actually win. So while the Democrats are running rampant, reaching the next generation three to one, there’s exactly one person in the Republican Party which talks a big game about reaching young people. And that’s me.

(01:14:39)
And let me level with all of you. I’m the new guy here, and so I know I have to earn your trust. What do you see? You see a young man who’s in a bit of a hurry, maybe a little ambitious, bit of a know-it-all it seems at times. I’m here to tell you no, I don’t know it all. I will listen. I will have the best people, the best and brightest in this country, whatever age they are, advising me. We will be probably many of the people on this stage included. That’s how I built my companies. I want to be challenged. I want people who disagree with me. That’s what makes America great, because we’re not a perfect nation-

Doug Burgum (01:15:12):

TikTok is [inaudible 01:15:13] Chinese Communist Party, and it’s not [inaudible 01:15:13].

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:15:12):

… we’re founded on the pursuit of perfection. That is what makes America great-

Doug Burgum (01:15:17):

… of Americans every-

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:15:19):

… And that is why we will end it once we win this election.

Doug Burgum (01:15:22):

I have to jump in here. I’m sorry, I have-

Stuart Varney (01:15:25):

… when Mr. Ramaswamy was speaking-

Doug Burgum (01:15:25):

There’s one person on this-

Nikki Haley (01:15:27):

This is infuriating because TikTok is one of the most dangerous social media apps that we could have and what you’ve got, honestly, every time I hear you, I feel a little bit dumber for what you say. Because I can’t believe-

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:15:38):

Governor Haley, if I may-

Nikki Haley (01:15:39):

… they hear about a TikTok situation. What they’re doing is these 150 million people are on TikTok. That means they can get your contacts, they can get your financial information, they can get your emails, they can get-

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:15:51):

Let me just say [inaudible 01:15:55], this is important, this is very important for our party-

Nikki Haley (01:15:58):

… text messages. They can get all of these things. China knows exactly what they’re doing. And what we’ve seen is, you’ve gone and you’ve helped China build medicines in China, not America-

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:16:02):

… and I’m going to say it. We should stop, we will… Excuse me. Excuse me.

Nikki Haley (01:16:03):

You’re now wanting kids to go and get on the social media that’s dangerous for all of us? You went and you were in business with the Chinese that gave Hunter Biden $5 million? We can’t trust you. We can’t trust you.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:16:13):

So let me say something. I think that we-

Nikki Haley (01:16:13):

We can’t have TikTok in our kids’ lives, we need to ban it.

Stuart Varney (01:16:17):

Mr. Ramaswamy, you have 15 seconds.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:16:21):

I think. Excuse me.

Speaker 12 (01:16:22):

You have 15 seconds, Mr. Ramaswamy.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:16:25):

Thank you. I think we would be better served as a Republican Party if we’re not sitting here hurling personal insults, and actually have a legitimate debate about policy following Reagan’s 11th Amendment, in his honor. And the answer is, that is what actually makes our country strong. And I believe in these people, these are good people on the stage. They disagree, but let’s have a legitimate disagreement. That’s what I would say.

Doug Burgum (01:16:51):

Stuart, can we get back to the question-

Dana Perino (01:16:55):

No, we cannot. Governor DeSantis, I’m going straight-

Doug Burgum (01:16:57):

The question is on technology, there’s one person on this stage that has a career in technology.

Dana Perino (01:16:57):

Sir, we’ll have to cut your mic and I don’t want to do that. I don’t. So Governor DeSantis, let me go to you. Experts say President Putin has ordered assassinations across Europe, cheated on arms control treaties with the US, and seeks to work with China to force our decline. President Reagan believed that if you want to prevent a war, you better be prepared to fight one. Today, the Republican Party is at odds over aid to Ukraine. The price tag so far is $76 billion. But is it in our best interest to degrade Russia’s military for less than 5% of what we pay annually on defense, especially when there are no US soldiers in the fight?

Ron DeSantis (01:17:36):

It’s in our interest to end this war. And that’s what I will do as president. We are not going to have a blank check. We will not have US troops, and we’re going to make the Europeans do what they need to do. But they’ve sent money to pay bureaucrats, pensions and salaries and funding small businesses halfway around the world. Meanwhile, our own country is being invaded. We don’t even have control of our own territory. We have got to defend the American people before we even worry about all these other things. And I watch these guys in Washington DC, and they don’t care about the American people. They don’t care about the fentanyl deaths. They don’t care about the communities being overrun because of this border. They don’t care about the Mexican drug cartels. So as commander in chief, I will defend this country’s sovereignty.

Nikki Haley (01:18:26):

But it’s not a territorial dispute, it’s never been a territorial dispute.

Tim Scott (01:18:30):

And 90% of the resources that we send over to Ukraine is guaranteed it’s a loan. It is not… 90% of the money that we send over there is loan. Well, we can talk about this, but at the end of the day, 90% of the money that we send over there is actually in a form of loan.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:18:47):

We’re not getting it back.

Tim Scott (01:18:47):

It’s actually not being paid by Ukraine, it’s paid by the NATO or NATO allies.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:18:51):

So I think it’s a good topic, it’s a good topic for debate.

Tim Scott (01:18:53):

I think it’s a really good topic too, but I’ll say let’s debate the fact that our national vital interest is in degrading the Russian military. By degrading the Russian military, we actually keep our homeland safer, we keep our troops at home and we all understand Article 5 of NATO. When in fact-

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:19:15):

We have to level with the American people on this.

Tim Scott (01:19:15):

I thought you said something about waiting until your turn to talk. So at the end of the day, I’m going to finish my… I’ll be happy to-

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:19:20):

Go ahead, and I’ll respond.

Tim Scott (01:19:21):

I’ll look forward to this one right now. So at the end of the day, when you think about the fact, if you want to keep American troops at home, the attack on NATO territory would bring us and our troops in. By degrading the Russian military, we reduce, if not eliminate, an attack on NATO territory.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:19:41):

If I may finish that exchange, we have to level with the American people on this issue. The reality is-

Speaker 13 (01:19:47):

We are leveling with-

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:19:47):

… just because Putin is an evil dictator does not mean that Ukraine is good. This is a country that has banned 11 opposition parties.

Nikki Haley (01:19:57):

A win for Russia is a win for China.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:19:58):

That is not true. We’re driving Russia… Excuse me.

Nikki Haley (01:20:00):

A win for Russia is a win for China.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:20:00):

Excuse me, and you’ll have a chance-

Nikki Haley (01:20:01):

But I forgot, you like China, that’s why you’re-

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:20:04):

You’ll have your chance in just a moment. The hurling personal insults isn’t helping. China is the real enemy and we’re driving Russia further into China’s arms. We need a reasonable peace plan to end this, especially… And this is a country whose president, just last week, was hailing a Nazi in his own ranks-

Mike Pence (01:20:19):

Vivek, if you let Putin have Ukraine, that’s a green light to China to take Taiwan. Peace comes through strength, get a reasonable plan to peace.

Stuart Varney (01:20:29):

Governor Christie-

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:20:29):

The communist party of China is the real enemy.

Stuart Varney (01:20:31):

Governor Christie, governor Christie, President Biden’s first two years have brought China, Russia and Iran closer together. Are we focused too much on Ukraine, and not enough on this threat from the new world order?

Chris Christie (01:20:47):

No, they’re all connected, Stuart. They’re all connected. The Chinese are paying for the Russian War in Ukraine. The Iranians are supplying more sophisticated weapons, and so are the North Koreans now as well, with the encouragement of the Chinese, the naivete on this stage from some of these folks, it’s extraordinary. Look, I understand people want to go and talk to Putin. Guess what? So did George W. Bush. So did Barack Obama. So did Donald Trump, and so did Joe Biden when he said a small invasion wouldn’t be so bad. Every one of them has been wrong. And the fact of the matter is, we need to say right now that the Chinese-Russian Alliance is something we have to fight against and we are not going to solve it by going over and cuddling up to Vladimir Putin.

(01:21:35)
Look, Donald Trump said Vladimir Putin was brilliant and a great leader. This is the person who is murdering people in his own country and now not having enough blood, he’s now going to Ukraine to murder innocent civilians and kidnap 20,000 children. And let me tell you, if you think that’s where it’s going to stop, if we give him any of Ukraine, next will be Poland. This is a guy who said… Wait one sec. This is a guy in 1991 who said that was the darkest moment in world history, when the Soviet Union fell. Listen, everybody, he wants to put the old band back together and only America can stop it. And when I’m president, we will.

Dana Perino (01:22:13):

Governor Burgum. I want to get to Governor Burgum. He hasn’t had a chance. I have a question I think you’re going to really like, or at least you have experience in it, and we need to talk about America’s farmers, because there is a foreign policy connection here. The US and China are in this fierce economic competition. It’s hurting American businesses and there is blowback against American farmers because China then targets them in retaliation. How would you as president protect American farmers and ranchers from that kind of retaliation from a foreign government like China?

Doug Burgum (01:22:44):

Well, first of all, we’ve got the best farmers and ranchers in the world right here in America. If they have a level playing field, they can out-compete anyone in the world. But this is part of the larger issue that we’re talking about here, which is, we’re in a Cold War with China, the Biden administration won’t admit that. But we’re also in a economic war through what we’re doing with agriculture and energy. And we’re also in a war with them relative to cyber war. We get attacked every day in North Dakota, every state, every school district, our tribes, all being attacked every day by either China, Russia, Iran, or North Korea. And now we’ve got a Biden administration whose whole policy is appeasement. They’re out there creating the world, making it less safe. $6 billion they traded for five people. They’ve just now set a price on anyone’s head who’s a tourist from America, who’s a student from America, for kidnapping.

(01:23:28)
If you want more kidnapping, put a price on it. And they’re also helping Iran get to have more closer to nuclear weapon, which pushes all of the Middle East closer to China and Russia. The whole thing is absurd. And then of course we’re going to give Ukraine to Russia, and then we’re going to give Taiwan to China and think that’s a foreign policy? That will make our nation less successful, make us more poor. And at the core of all that is energy policy because China imports 10 million barrels of oil a day. They’re the largest import in the world. And we’ve had four cabinet members from the Biden administration there this summer, and none of them talked about US energy. The first one to go to each of those countries was Kerry, to talk about the folly of the climate policy, which is making the world less stable. It’s empowering dictators. It’s not about climate change that we need be worried about. It’s about the Biden climate policies that are actually the existential threat to America’s future.

Dana Perino (01:24:19):

Thank you.

Speaker 13 (01:24:19):

Can I speak-

Ilia Calderón (01:24:22):

Governor Haley, Mexico’s president called who supports sending US military into the country, ” scoundrels.” Mexico is the United States’ most important trade partner and border security. You say you will send special operations to attack the cartels in Mexico. So this means boots on the ground, drone strikes?

Nikki Haley (01:24:47):

It means special operations. It’s how we deal with our terrorists and what you need to do is understand that Mexico’s not being a good partner if we lost 75,000 Americans last year. Mexico’s not being a good partner if they’re letting the cartels get away with what they’re getting away with. What we will do is, we will make sure that we send in our special operations and we will take out the cartels, we’ll take out their operations, we’ll take out anything that’s doing it, but we’re going to go after China, because China is the one sending the fentanyl in the first place, and we will end all normal trade relations until China stops sending fentanyl, and then we’ll do the special operations and we’ll get it from both sides.

(01:25:24)
This is where President Trump went wrong. He focused on trade with China. He didn’t focus on the fact that they were buying up our farmland. He didn’t focus on the fact that they were killing Americans. He didn’t focus on the fact that they were stealing $600 billion in intellectual property. He didn’t focus on the fact that they put a spy base off our shores in Cuba. They didn’t focus enough on the fact that all of our law enforcement drones in America are Chinese, and we’ve got all these little surveillance cells. We need to start focusing on what keeps Americans safe. That hasn’t happened in a long time. As your president, I will make sure every American is safe, and we’ll do whatever it takes to make that happen.

Dana Perino (01:25:59):

All right, I want to get to Senator Scott. You’re all auditioning for the job as President of the United States. You want to earn these votes, but the world’s problems land in the Oval Office. During the presidential debates in the year 2000, neither Al Gore nor George W. Bush was asked about Al-Qaeda, yet, just one year later, Al-Qaeda’s attack on September 11th claimed nearly 3,000 lives. And the farther we get from September 11th, the closer we are to September 10th. Senator Scott, you have no executive branch experience. What has prepared you to protect the nation from a major manmade national security crisis?

Tim Scott (01:26:44):

One of the things I’ve had the good fortune of doing is serving on committees in the United States Senate, like the senate armed services committee. I’m on the senate foreign relations committee, also on the finance committee and the banking committee. Talk about addressing the issue of fentanyl. I’ve written the legislation, passed it through the banking committee and the Senate, that would freeze the assets and sanction the accounts of the Mexican cartels. There are weapons that we have within the arsenal that I was able to get passed 23 to 0, in the polarizing Senate as it is.

(01:27:16)
I’ve also understood without question the fact that if you look at the details before 9/11, there was information and intelligence that was available that suggested an attack was coming. Having the right intelligence partners with us is key to making sure that we prevent the next 9/11 from ever happening. Having that experience for the last 10 years is really important in getting the job done.

Dana Perino (01:27:41):

30 seconds to you, Mr. Pence.

Mike Pence (01:27:44):

Well, I think you asked a question about executive experience, and I think it’s vitally important. And I stand before you today as a candidate for president because I think this country’s in a lot of trouble. You hear the fire on the stage tonight, you hear the fire in all of our voices, and it’s because Joe Biden is weak in this country, at home and abroad. This is a time for those of us that have the experience, the tested experience, and a commitment to the conservative agenda that Ronald Reagan brought forward in this party, of a strong national defense, standing with our allies, standing up to our enemies, supporting limited government and traditional values need to step forward-

Dana Perino (01:28:23):

Understood.

Mike Pence (01:28:23):

… Because frankly, our party does face a time for choosing, as they said at the top of this debate, whether we’re going to stand on the foundation of that conservative agenda that Ronald Reagan poured, or whether we’re going to follow the siren song of populism on more to conservative principles.

Dana Perino (01:28:39):

And now is the time-

Mike Pence (01:28:40):

I’m the most experienced, most qualified, and most consistent conservative in this field. And I’m ready to lead America at home and abroad on day one.

Dana Perino (01:28:48):

Okay, it is now a time for choosing to go to a break. Ilia.

Ilia Calderón (01:28:50):

We need to go to a commercial break. Reagan built a coalition that lasted decades. Can any of these candidates do the same? We’ll take that up when the debate continues.

Speaker 2 (01:29:07):

Do you trust our government and where the economy is heading? Does the thought of losing your hard-earned retirement savings to DC’s reckless spending scare the heck out of you? Well, you’re not alone. Smart Americans are taking action while they still can, by reaching out to Birch Gold Group. For over 20 years, Birch Gold has helped concerned Americans protect their futures by moving part of an existing IRA or 401( k) into a physical gold IRA. Because when things are a mess, like right now, Americans turn to gold. With an A+ rating, with a better business bureau, and thousands of happy customers, Birch Gold is the trusted leader in gold. They’re busier than ever because people are taking control of their savings away from the government and into their own hands. Text the word “now” to the number 98-98-98, to get a free info kit on gold. There’s no pressure and no obligation, just information. So get your no-cost info kit now. Text “now” to 98-98-98.

Speaker 14 (01:30:38):

Hi, welcome to YouTube.

Speaker 15 (01:30:39):

Thanks, it’s great to be here. I’m just going to upload my video right now.

Speaker 14 (01:30:42):

Let me see it first. [blows whistle 01:30:46]. Flag.

Speaker 15 (01:30:47):

Did you just cancel me? All right, I’m going to be leaving now.

Speaker 14 (01:30:51):

Where are you going?

Speaker 15 (01:30:52):

To a place where I can’t get canceled and they celebrate free speech.

Speaker 14 (01:30:57):

What, in fantasy land?

Speaker 15 (01:30:58):

It’s not fantasy land. It’s called Rumble. Later, pal.

Kevin Sorbo (01:31:08):

Do you owe over $10,000 in back taxes? Kevin Sorbo here with an important message. The Biden administration has proposed an $80 billion plan to boost IRS collections. This means they could garnish your wages, levy your bank account, and even seize your property. Tax Network USA, a trusted tax firm, can help protect your income and assets today while quickly settling your tax debt. But you have to act now while you still have options. Call Tax Network USA today.

Speaker 11 (01:31:58):

Hey there, stop changing channels. I’m out here in the woods and you got to see this. It’s the new Patriot Power Generator 2000X, a solar generator worth its weight in gold when your power goes out, with double the capacity and expandable so you can run your fridge even longer. It’s fume free, safe to use inside, and never needs gas, ever. Plus, you’ll get the solar panel free. Go to 4Patriots.com and do it now. Get your solar generator with free shipping and free panel, at 4Patriots.com.

Stuart Varney (01:33:07):

Welcome back to the Republican Primary Debate here at the Reagan Library. We’ve got a lot more issues to cover and a lot more questions to go, so let’s dive right back in.

(01:33:17)
We’re here in California where gas is nearing $6 a gallon. Oil is close to $100 a barrel, again. You say drill, baby, drill, but the courts won’t let you. Mr. Ramaswamy, how would you bring down prices without immediate drilling?

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:33:33):

Well, look, I think that we do have to run through the courts and get through that administrative state to make sure we’re using the natural resources here at home, but here’s the other thing that we can do that’s easy.

Stuart Varney (01:33:44):

It would take forever, Mr. Ramaswamy.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:33:45):

And it addresses the national debt as well as brings down prices, put people back to work. We are using taxpayer money to pay people more to stay at home than to go to work. That is wrong. That contributes to our supply chain crisis. It contributes to inflation. That’s the easiest way to unlock this economy.

(01:34:05)
Here’s the other thing. We have to put the Federal Reserve back in its place. This is an agency that has gone rogue. So in January 2026, when I have the opportunity as your next commander in chief, we will have a new chairman of the Federal Reserve who places priority on dollar stability. And then most importantly, send packing 75% of the administrative state, reduce the federal employee headcount by 75%, rescind 50% of unconstitutional federal regulations that are shackling businesses, both large and small.

(01:34:37)
I’ve offered a very clear, practical plan to do it. That’s how we unleash the economy. That’s how we revive the integrity of a three-branch constitutional republic rather than this technocracy and aristocracy in the administrative state.

Stuart Varney (01:34:51):

Vice President Pence, your response please.

Mike Pence (01:34:54):

I think one of the signature accomplishments of our administration was in just a few short years, we achieved energy independence. We became a net exporter of energy for the first time in 75 years. But on day one, Joe Biden declared a war on energy, which was no surprise, because when Joe Biden ran for president, he said he was going to end fossil fuels, and they’ve been working overtime to do that ever since.

(01:35:21)
If I’m President of the United States, we’re going to open up federal lands. We’re going to unleash American energy. We’re going to have an all-of-the-above energy strategy. I have a plan that actually would not only reclaim energy independence, but in 2006, America lost our position as the leading energy producer on earth. I believe in the next 10 years with the right policies and experienced leadership in the White House, we can reclaim our role as the leading energy producer on earth, and that’ll grow the American economy for generations to come.

Stuart Varney (01:35:57):

Governor Haley, reaction to that please.

Speaker 18 (01:35:59):

As the only person who’s leading an energy state, could I answer the energy question?

Dana Perino (01:36:01):

No. Governor Haley.

Nikki Haley (01:36:03):

The first thing I’ll say is what I saw at the United Nations is energy security is national security. We need a president that understands we have to partner with our producers and make sure that we have their backs. What you don’t need is a president who is against energy independence. Ron DeSantis is against fracking. He’s against drilling. He’s been against… You did it.

(01:36:25)
He always talks about what happens on day one. You better watch out because what happens on day two is when you’re in trouble, day two in Florida, you banned fracking, you banned offshore drilling.

Ron DeSantis (01:36:35):

That is not true.

Nikki Haley (01:36:35):

You did it on federal lands, and you took green subsidies that you didn’t have to take. It is true. Look at day two.

Stuart Varney (01:36:40):

Governor DeSantis, you were mentioned. You have the right to respond, 30 seconds.

Ron DeSantis (01:36:44):

I just did a plan out in West Texas for American Energy Dominance. We’re going to choose Midland over Moscow. We’re going to choose the Marcellus over the [inaudible 01:36:53] and we’re going to choose [inaudible 01:36:54] over Beijing and we are going to lower your gas prices. We are going to get that job done because it’s important for our national security. It’s important for jobs, and that’s one of the best ways to drive down inflation.

Stuart Varney (01:37:05):

Governor DeSantis-

Nikki Haley (01:37:06):

Did you ban fracking? Did you ban [inaudible 01:37:08]?

Stuart Varney (01:37:10):

Governor DeSantis. This question is for you.

Ron DeSantis (01:37:12):

Our voters enact enacted a constitutional amendment.

Nikki Haley (01:37:14):

You banned it before they voted.

Ron DeSantis (01:37:15):

That doesn’t allow… No, it’s not true.

Nikki Haley (01:37:17):

You banned it before they voted-

Ron DeSantis (01:37:18):

Nikki-

Nikki Haley (01:37:18):

And not only that fracking wasn’t… They didn’t vote on fracking.

Ron DeSantis (01:37:21):

She’s just totally wrong. They voted it in.

Nikki Haley (01:37:22):

Check it.

Ron DeSantis (01:37:23):

That’s what we did. On shore, we do do it in Florida. We don’t have as much as maybe West Texas, but we do it. But that was a constitution amendment, so that’s just wrong and let’s just get real here. My plan will get the job done. We are going to be energy dominant.

Nikki Haley (01:37:36):

-before the voted, and the voters didn’t even vote on fracking.

Stuart Varney (01:37:41):

We’re moving on with this question for Governor DeSantis. Governor-

Ron DeSantis (01:37:45):

As the only leader of an energy-

Stuart Varney (01:37:46):

Excuse me. We cannot talk over each other. We must respect each other’s time. My apologies for that.

Ron DeSantis (01:37:52):

I’m ready, Stuart. Let’s do it.

Stuart Varney (01:37:53):

Governor DeSantis, this is your question. The Biden administration is hell bent on student loan forgiveness, but you say colleges should be on the hook when graduates cannot pay their debt. How does that address the cost of college itself?

Ron DeSantis (01:38:09):

Because the colleges are going to have to make a decision. Do we offer, do we expand the gender studies department knowing some of those graduates may not have great learning opportunities? No. They’re going to focus on the things that really matter. They’re going to make different choices. They’re going to try to graduate people in four years.

(01:38:24)
I also just want to come back to something Dana asked last segment about 9-11 because I was just at the 9-11 Memorial with the families, my wife and I, everybody. It’s very touching to be there, and it affected my life because I ended up joining the military as a result of that. I had been a blue collar kid, minimum wage in Dunedin, Florida. I ended up getting through Yale and Harvard Law School and somehow came out more conservative than when I went in, and that is not easy to do.

(01:38:47)
Had a lot of opportunities to make money, but I wanted to serve, and I’ll never forget coming back on the plane from Iraq landing in Coronado, California, North Island, and feeling that breeze off the Pacific Ocean and saying you know what? I am lucky to have been born an American, and I think being able to serve, and I’ll be the first president elected since 1988 who’s actually served overseas in a war. I think that’s going to help me as commander in chief to know how you see these issues and understand that there are real lives at stake for people that wear the uniform.

Dana Perino (01:39:17):

We know that Governor Haley’s husband is serving right now as well, and we thank him for that. Senator Scott, the national debt has nearly doubled in your time in office. The approval rate for Congress is at a mere 19%. If this were a business, you’d probably all be fired in Washington, but you’re here tonight looking for a promotion.

(01:39:34)
In 2013, Governor Haley hired you for the Senate. I’d like you to tell her why you should be promoted to CEO of the nation instead of her.

Tim Scott (01:39:45):

Certainly. One of the things I’d say is if you look at our national debt of $33 trillion, I would love to have an opportunity to have this country pass a balanced budget amendment that would constrain the spending in Washington in the same fashion that it does in every state in our nation. Number one.

(01:40:03)
Number two, if you want to actually reduce our national debt, you have to grow our economy. In order to grow our economy, you need to create about 10 million jobs to grow our economy at 5%. You can do that in three specific sectors. Number one, the energy sector. We could create between three and three-and-a-half million jobs if we unleashed all of our energy resources. America is the most, we’re the richest country if you combine coal, gas, and oil. Why not unleash all of our resources? Number two, we’ve lost 100,000 factories, 100,000 factories in the last 25 years. If we continued on my Made in America Plan, we could bring jobs back to America in a similar fashion that we did when I wrote the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.

(01:40:51)
We actually lowered the corporate tax from 35% to 21%, reshored or repatriated $1.7 trillion. We brought the unemployment rates for African-Americans, Hispanics, and Asians to the lowest level in the history of the country and a 70-year low for women.

Dana Perino (01:41:08):

Governor Haley, would you think you would deserve the promotion?

Nikki Haley (01:41:12):

Well look, I appreciate Tim. We’ve known each other a long time, but he’s been there 12 years and he hasn’t done any of that. They’ve only given four budgets on time in 40 years. He was part of that-

Tim Scott (01:41:23):

The biggest, largest tax cut in the history-

Nikki Haley (01:41:25):

He increased the national debt. He voted for the spending. He has made sure that the borders are open, and they haven’t done [inaudible 01:41:40]. 12 years. Where have you been? Where have you been, Tim? 12 years. We’ve waited and nothing has happened.

Tim Scott (01:41:40):

Here’s what you’ve done-

Ron DeSantis (01:41:41):

Here’s the thing that I to find interesting.

Tim Scott (01:41:44):

Ron, let me finish it first.

Ron DeSantis (01:41:45):

All these guys have said-

Tim Scott (01:41:45):

Here’s the fact-

Ron DeSantis (01:41:46):

And I appreciate a lot of the things they’re saying.

Tim Scott (01:41:48):

Nikki Haley-

Ron DeSantis (01:41:49):

I’m the only one up here who’s gotten in the big fights and has delivered big victories for the people of Florida, and that’s what it’s all about. You can always talk, but when it gets hot in there, when they’re shooting arrows at you, are you going to be stand up for parents’ rights, to keep the state free? Are you going to be able to do all those things? And in the State of Florida, because of our success, the Democratic Party lies in ruins. We have won the big fights. We have turned our state into a Republican state. People respond to leadership. I’ve done it while others have talked about it.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:42:21):

We actually have a CEO [inaudible 01:42:23]. What I think we need. If I may just briefly interject here-

Tim Scott (01:42:26):

I haven’t had my opportunity 30 seconds-

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:42:27):

We need a zero-based budgeting. That’s the way businesses are actually run. Start with zero as the baseline for the budget, and then see what’s actually necessary. There isn’t a blue state or a red state in this union that does it. The federal government doesn’t do it, but successful companies, including the ones that I’ve built as a CEO-

Dana Perino (01:42:46):

I think that Governor Burgum would disagree with you, though.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:42:49):

-will do it. We need a CEO in the White House to get that done.

Dana Perino (01:42:50):

Governor Burgum runs a state that way.

(01:42:52)
Yes, go ahead.

Doug Burgum (01:42:53):

Ask questions you didn’t ask the only guy that’s been attacked. You have energy questions. You don’t ask anything, but I’m just going to say right now, when you say nobody else has done it, the energy plans that have all been announced in the last month by these other folks on stage, we’re already doing it in North Dakota. The border plans they’re already talking about, we’ve got troops down at the border flying helicopter missions from North Dakota from San Diego to the Gulf Coast trying to stop transnational criminal organizations from inflicting the invasion and the mass casualties in our state.

(01:43:19)
And on the energy policy, we’re already doing it, and it’s not saying when nobody else has done the big fights, North Dakota was leading the charge. We won the battle to get… The Biden administration was ignoring the law. They were the first administration since Truman that wasn’t holding the quarterly required lease sales, and we won that in federal court [inaudible 01:43:37]. We won that in federal court. We’re fighting the Biden administration on 20 fronts.

(01:43:40)
To say that nobody’s fighting the big fights. Just look at the record of what we’re doing right now. Energy, economy, national security. I’ve been talking about it since day one and now finally, good, we’re having the conversation about it, but we’ve got the answer in North Dakota.

Stuart Varney (01:43:52):

Governor Burgum, let’s talk big government. This question’s for you. Big government keeps getting bigger. One fifth of all new jobs this year are being created by the government. Governor Burgum, you say you want to shrink the size of government, but it has been a century since any president has done that. Why would you be any different?

Doug Burgum (01:44:12):

Well, because we’ve done it in North Dakota. When I took office, we shrunk the state budget general fund by 27% in the first four months I was office, and we all the trains still running on time. Why? Because you had a business leader that was actually there.

(01:44:26)
Inside of every government job, there’s 10 or 20% of mind-numbing, soul-sucking work that even the state and federal employees don’t want to do, and you can engineer that work out of the job. That would free up right there, 20% of 2 million civilian employees, and by the way, we’ve got 10 million jobs open. They’d have plenty to do and they could be generating taxes instead of being paid by taxes. This is totally possible to do it if you have somebody that understands because having worked in technology for 30 years, everything we had to do was to be better, faster and cheaper the next day. That’s what we can do in government. That’s what we’re doing in North Dakota.

Dana Perino (01:45:00):

All right, Governor DeSantis, I want to ask you about something that I think is on a lot of Republicans minds. This election could come down to less than 50,000 votes in three states. Abortion was on the ballot in six states in 2022. Republicans lost all of them. Next year abortion will likely be on the ballot in Arizona. That is a must win state. Governor DeSantis, how are you going to win over independent pro-choice voters in Arizona?

Ron DeSantis (01:45:30):

Same way we did in Florida. We won the greatest Republican victory in a governor’s race in the history of the state, over 1.5 million votes. We were winning places like Miami-Dade County, Palm Beach, that nobody thought was possible because we were leading with purpose and conviction.

(01:45:44)
I reject this idea that pro-lifers are to blame for midterm defeats. I think there’s other reasons for that. The former president, he’s missing in action tonight. He’s had a lot to say about that. He should be here explaining his comments to try to say that pro-life protections are somehow a terrible thing. I want him to look into the eyes and tell people who’ve been fighting this fight for a long time. My wife and I earlier today were at the grave site of President and Mrs. Reagan, and I noticed that there was a quote where it says, “Every single person has purpose and worth.” We’re better off when everybody counts, and I think we should stand for what we believe in. I think we should hold the Democrats accountable for their extremism, supporting abortion all the way up until the moment of birth. That is infanticide and that is wrong.

Dana Perino (01:46:36):

Let me ask Governor Christie. Governor Christie, do you think that Republicans can do that in Arizona if this referendum is on the ballot there?

Chris Christie (01:46:48):

Yeah, because I did it in New Jersey, Dana.

Dana Perino (01:46:51):

Then why are all these other states losing?

Chris Christie (01:46:53):

Well, because they don’t have leaders in those states who are leading the fight the way it should be led. The fact is, look, I was a governor here of the only blue state that’s represented up here. This is where the fight is really tough for Republicans, and those are the states that we’re going to have to try to win if we’re going to win the White House back. What we did was 14 times, Dana, in eight years I vetoed Planned Parenthood funding 14 times. No one else gets it that much. The Democrats just kept sending it to me and I kept saying no because I believe in life, but I also believe in state’s rights and I think we fought hard against Roe versus Wade for decades to say that states should make these decisions.

(01:47:30)
So we’re going to have those fights in the states, but what you need is a leader who can talk to people and make them understand that if you’re pro-life, you have to be pro-life for the entire life, not just the nine months in the womb. And we talked a lot about fentanyl tonight and we haven’t spoken one moment about treatment, but we need to make sure that for the drug-addicted 16 year old on the floor of the county lockup, her life is precious too. We need to be providing treatment to cure this as a disease that it is. If you’re pro-life, you got to be pro-life for the entire life. We start talking like that, they’re going to do what I did in the blue state, which was get reelected with 61% of the vote and won 70% of independents and 51% of Latinos because I told them the truth from my heart.

Dana Perino (01:48:13):

Thank you.

Ilia Calderón (01:48:13):

Vice President Pence, the latest Univision poll found that 73% of Latino voters think the Republican party doesn’t care about or is being hostile toward them, the Hispanic community. Only Governor DeSantis has translated his campaign into Spanish. How will you reach out to Latino voters?

Mike Pence (01:48:34):

Well, I promise you that we’re going to continue to build bridges to every community in this country, and I’m incredibly proud of that tax cut and tax reform bill. I worked on Capitol Hill to help get that bill passed into law, the largest tax cut in American history. We saw literally the lowest unemployment ever recorded for Hispanic Americans, the lowest unemployment ever recorded for African Americans, 50 year low for women. So I think the President of the United States needs to be a champion for the American dream for every American.

(01:49:07)
It begins with the unborn and the aging and the infirm, and it begins with every ethnic group in this country. And I promise you, if I’m President of the United States, I’ll be a champion. I’ll be a champion for the American dream, for Hispanic Americans and for every American. So help me God.

Ilia Calderón (01:49:24):

Senator Scott, reaction?

Tim Scott (01:49:25):

Yes, there’s no doubt that if you lead by example, it’s the best way to get the job done. If you look at my office in the Senate, my chief of staff is the only Hispanic female chief of staff in the Senate. I hired her because she was the best, highest-qualified person we have. What we need are leaders who lead by example.

(01:49:48)
And I will simply say I would love to finish my conversation with Nikki as it relates to the job that needs to get done. Nikki offered a 10 cent gas tax increase in South Carolina. Talk about someone who has never seen a federal dollar. She doesn’t like. 10 cents on the gallon in South Carolina as the UN ambassador. You literally-

Nikki Haley (01:50:13):

Bring it, Tim.

Tim Scott (01:50:13):

-put $50,000 on curtains and a $15 million subsidized location. Next

Nikki Haley (01:50:21):

You got bad information. First of all, I fought the gas tax in South Carolina multiple times against the establishment.

Tim Scott (01:50:27):

Just go to YouTube and see it yourself.

Nikki Haley (01:50:29):

Against the establishment. You want to know that 10 cent was? When they wouldn’t pass the gas tax, the establishment and the companies wanted me to do it so much that I said, the only way I will pass it is if you will give us three… Excuse me-

Tim Scott (01:50:38):

Here’s what you have to do. All you have to do is go watch Nikki Haley on YouTube.

Dana Perino (01:50:43):

Let her finish.

Nikki Haley (01:50:44):

If you will give me three times the deduction in income tax, then I will look at your gas tax, which is why it didn’t happen.

Tim Scott (01:50:49):

You said yes. Exactly, right?

Nikki Haley (01:50:49):

Secondly, on the 50 million-

Tim Scott (01:50:54):

Here is a nice part.

Nikki Haley (01:50:55):

Secondly, on the curtains, do your homework, Tim, because Obama bought those curtains.

Tim Scott (01:50:59):

Did you send them back?

Nikki Haley (01:50:59):

It’s in the press.

Tim Scott (01:50:59):

Did you send them back?

Nikki Haley (01:51:01):

It’s the State Department. Did you send them back? You’re the one that works in Congress.

Tim Scott (01:51:05):

Oh my gosh.

Nikki Haley (01:51:05):

You get it done.

Tim Scott (01:51:06):

You hung them on your curtains.

Nikki Haley (01:51:08):

They were there before I even showed up at the residence. You scrapping. You are scrapping. [inaudible 01:51:16].

Tim Scott (01:51:15):

Here’s here’s the fact though. You wanted a gas tax increase and then you wanted [inaudible 01:51:27].

Stuart Varney (01:51:27):

Ladies and Gentlemen, we do not intend to go ahead like this. In fact, we are about to take a commercial break. We’ll have more of the second Republican Debate live from the Reagan Presidential Library in just a few moments.

Speaker 2 (01:51:46):

Do you trust our government and where the economy is heading? Does the thought of losing your hard-earned retirement savings to DC’s reckless spending scare the heck out of you? Well, you’re not alone. Smart Americans are taking action while they still can by reaching out to Birch Gold Group.

(01:52:02)
For over 20 years, Birch Gold has helped concerned Americans protect their futures by moving part of an existing IRA or 401K into a Physical Gold IRA. Because when things are a mess, like right now, Americans turn to gold. With an A+ rating with a Better Business Bureau and thousands of happy customers, birch Gold is the trusted leader in gold.

(01:52:24)
They’re busier than ever because people are taking control of their savings away from the government and into their own hands. Text the word NOW to the number 989898 to get a free info kit on gold. There’s no pressure and no obligation, just information. So get your no-cost info kit now. Text now to 989898.

Speaker 17 (01:52:46):

How are we looking up there Sergeant [inaudible 01:52:49].

Speaker 18 (01:52:49):

On target on time, boys. Fire [inaudible 01:52:52]. Fire.

Joe Biden (01:53:02):

I became a professor at the University of Pennsylvania. You make me miss being a professor at Penn. I was a professor at the University of Pennsylvania. I was a professor at the University of Pennsylvania. I became a professor at University of Pennsylvania. I was a professor at Penn. I was a full professor at the University of Pennsylvania. Professor at the University of Pennsylvania. I was the Ben Franklin professor of practice at the University of Pennsylvania.

Speaker 19 (01:53:46):

Hello, I’m Rumble.

Speaker 20 (01:53:47):

And I’m YouTube.

Speaker 19 (01:53:48):

YouTube, why are you dressed like that?

Speaker 20 (01:53:50):

Well, I’ve been seeing a lot of violations in the community lately, so I’m enforcing that.

Speaker 19 (01:53:54):

You mean like people not following your policies?

Speaker 20 (01:53:57):

Strike one.

Speaker 19 (01:53:58):

What if someone tells the truth, but it’s labeled as misinformation.

Speaker 20 (01:54:01):

Strike two.

Speaker 19 (01:54:03):

Wow. What if I want to ask questions and have different opinions on things?

Speaker 20 (01:54:07):

Strike three. You’re out of here.

Cade Courtley (01:54:17):

When things go sideways, will you be prepared? Hey, it’s Cade Courtley, former Navy Seal Platoon Commander. I want to introduce you to the Patriot Power Generator 2000X. Use the endless free power of the sun to power lights, your TV, medical equipment, even run your fridge, and that’s without gas, fumes or noise. Go to 4patriots.com. You’ll get a solar panel included free. This is about peace of mind. Get your solar generator and free panel at 4patriots.com.

Kevin Sorbo (01:55:06):

Do you owe over $10,000 in back taxes? Kevin Sorbo here with an important message. The Biden Administration has proposed an $80 billion plan to boost IRS collections. This means they could garnish your wages, levy your bank account, and even seize your property. Tax Network USA, a trusted tax firm, can help protect your income and assets today while quickly settling your tax debt. But you have to act now while you still have options. Call Tax Network USA today.

Speaker 2 (01:55:36):

Does the thought of losing your hard-earned retirement savings to DC’s reckless spending scare the heck out of you. Smart Americans are taking action. By texting the word now to 989898 for a free info kit on gold from Birch Gold Group.

(01:55:51)
For 20 years, Birch Gold has helped concerned Americans protect their future by moving part of an existing IRA or 401K into a Physical Gold IRA. Text now to 989898 now for a free info kit.

Dana Perino (01:56:24):

And welcome back to the final minutes. I could go another hour, but we only have a few minutes. And candidates, it’s now obvious that if you all stay in the race, former President Donald Trump wins the nomination. None of you have indicated that you’re dropping out. So which one of you on stage tonight should be voted off the island? Please use your marker to write your choice on the notepad in front of you, 15 seconds starting now. Of the people on the stage-

Nikki Haley (01:56:56):

Are you serious?

Dana Perino (01:56:57):

Who should be v-

Ron DeSantis (01:56:57):

I’ll decline to do that with all due respect.

Dana Perino (01:56:58):

I’m absolutely serious.

Ron DeSantis (01:57:00):

I mean, we’re here, we’re happy to debate. I think that that’s disrespectful to my fellow competitors.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:57:16):

I’m not doing it. [inaudible 01:57:17]

Dana Perino (01:57:16):

Nobody wants to participate.

Ron DeSantis (01:57:16):

Let’s do some questions. Let’s talk about the future of the country. [inaudible 01:57:17].

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:57:16):

I want to be clear-

Dana Perino (01:57:16):

Let me ask you this-

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:57:16):

If I may [inaudible 01:57:17].

Dana Perino (01:57:17):

Let me ask you something then if you won’t answer to that question, let me ask you this one. What is your mathematical path, Governor DeSantis, in order to try to beat President Trump who has a commanding and enduring lead in this race?

Ron DeSantis (01:57:28):

So polls don’t elect presidents, voters elect presidents. And we’re going to take the case of the people in these early states. We’re going to do it in the state-by-state direction, and why? Because as Reagan said in his day, this is our time for choosing.

(01:57:42)
We are not getting a mulligan on the 2024 election. Republicans have lost three straight elections in a row. We are supposed to have a red wave. With inflation at 9% it crashed and burned. Not in Florida, it didn’t. We delivered it in Florida. And so we’ve got to choose right. We’ve got to win, and we need somebody that’s going to be able to serve two terms. So in January of 2023, they’ll be able to address the nation saying, we turned the economy around, we secured the border, and we fended off the threat from communist China as your president, I will get that job done.

Stuart Varney (01:58:12):

Governor Christie, I believe I did see you write something. Governor Christie, I believe. [inaudible 01:58:18]. Excuse me. Governor Christie, I believe I did see you write something on the card.

Chris Christie (01:58:23):

No, but I’ll certainly tell you.

Stuart Varney (01:58:24):

Go.

Dana Perino (01:58:25):

Okay.

Chris Christie (01:58:26):

Look, I think I’ve been the only one on this stage who’s been clear about this. I vote Donald Trump off the island right now, and the reason I voted him off the island-

Stuart Varney (01:58:36):

Any of the people on the stage [inaudible 01:58:38].-

Chris Christie (01:58:38):

Every person on the stage has shown the respect for Republican voters to come here to express their views, honestly, candidly and directly and to take your questions honestly, I have respect for every man and woman on the stage because they’ve done it. In fact, put your hand down for a second. I still got time, dude. So chill out. Here look, this guy has not only divided our party, he’s divided families all over this country. He’s divided friends all over this country. I’ve spoken to people and I know everyone else has who have sat at Thanksgiving dinner or at a birthday party and can’t have a conversation anymore if they disagree with Donald Trump. He needs to be moving off the island, and he needs to be taken out of this process.

Dana Perino (01:59:25):

Can we give Vivek 15 seconds?

Stuart Varney (01:59:26):

You have 15 seconds, Vivek.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:59:29):

I appreciate your sense of humor. Look, I have a different view on this. I think Trump was an excellent president, but the America First agenda does not belong to one man. It does not belong to Donald Trump. It doesn’t belong to me. It belongs to you, the people of this country.

(01:59:46)
And the question is, who’s going to unite this country and take the America First agenda to the next level? When we rallied behind the cry to make America great again, we did not just hunger for a single man. We hungered for the unapologetic pursuit of excellence. Yes, I will respect Donald Trump and his legacy because it’s the right thing to do. But we will unite this country to take the America First agenda to the next level, and that will take a different generation to do it

Stuart Varney (02:00:15):

That does it. I repeat, that does it. For the second Republican primary debate, live from the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library.

Dana Perino (02:00:23):

Thank you to all the candidates. We’ve loved having you here tonight, and we will see you out on the campaign trail.

Ilia Calderón (02:00:27):

Have a great evening. Thank you for joining us, everyone. Goodnight.

Transcribe Your Own Content

Try Rev and save time transcribing, captioning, and subtitling.

PCMag Editors Choice
TrustPilot Reviews
Other Related Transcripts

Copyright Disclaimer

Under Title 17 U.S.C. Section 107, allowance is made for "fair use" for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and research. Fair use is permitted by copyright statute that might otherwise be infringing.

Trust pilot grey score card
PCMag Editors Choice
PC editor choice logo
Popular Transcription Resources
Audio Transcription
Transcribe Zoom Recordings & Meetings
Transcribe Video to Text
Transcribe a YouTube Video to Text
How to Convert MP3 to Text
Transcribe an Interview
Best Transcription Apps
Transcribe Podcasts to TextPodcast Transcription: Why Transcribe Your Podcast?
Best Audio Transcription Software
Transcribe MP4 Files to Text
Stay updated.
Get a weekly digest of the week’s most important transcripts in your inbox. It’s the news, without the news.


Transcription
How It Works
FAQ
Free Call Recorder
Voice Recorder App
Transcription App
Online Voice Recorder
Audio Trimmer & Cutter
Transcribe Audio to Text
Automated Transcription
Captions
How It Works
FAQ
Caption Converter
Subtitles
Foreign Subtitles
Enterprise
Security & Privacy
API
Speech to Text API
Integrations
About
Press
Careers
Freelancers
Blog
Resources
Affiliates
Influencers
Help
Transcript Library
Get in touch
1717 W 6th St.
Suite 310, Austin,
TX 78703
Contact Us
888-369-0701
support@rev.com
    
BECOME A FREELANCER
© Rev.com
Reviews | Terms | Privacy | CA Privacy | Sitemap


Skip to content
Why Rev?
Services
Solutions
Developers
Resources
Rev
Login
Get Started
« Return to Transcript Library home

Search
Nov 9, 2023

RNC Third Republican Presidential Primary Debate Transcript
RNC Third Republican Presidential Primary Debate Transcript
Rev › Blog › Transcripts › Chris Christie › RNC Third Republican Presidential Primary Debate Transcript
The third Republican Presidential Primary Debate hosted by NBC News, live from the Adrienne Arsht Center in Miami, Florida. Read the transcript here.



Transcribe Your Own Content

Try Rev and save time transcribing, captioning, and subtitling.

Search the transcript here...
Speaker 1 (00:34):
Tonight, a critical test in the race for the White House, five Republicans battling to become their party’s 2024 presidential nominee. The candidates ready to make their case on why they’re prepared to be commander-in-chief amid two wars on the world stage, how they plan to tackle stubborn inflation and how they can unite a deeply divided electorate. Who is best to take on President Biden? And can any of them first be former President Trump? Who’s far ahead in the polls? The candidates are here. Florida Governor Ron DeSantis, former UN Ambassador Nikki Haley, entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy, former New Jersey Governor Chris Christie, and South Carolina, Senator Tim Scott.

(01:26)
From NBC News, the Republican Presidential Debate. Live from the Adrienne Arsht Center in Miami, Florida.

Lester Holt (01:50):

And good evening everyone. Welcome to the Republican Presidential Debate, I’m Lester Holt, anchor of NBC Nightly News.

Kristen Welker (01:56):

Good evening, I’m Kristen Welker, moderator of NBC’s Meet the Press.

Hugh Hewitt (02:01):

Hello, I’m Hugh Hewitt, host of Salem Radio’s, the Hugh Hewitt Show.

Lester Holt (02:04):

We are now just 68 days from the Iowa caucuses when Republican primary voters will begin to determine their party’s nominee for president. Tonight, we’ll question five candidates seeking that nomination on how they’re best prepared to be commander-in-chief, and of course how best to bring down prices impacting Americans across the country. We have two hours for a serious debate on the issues that matter most to Republican voters. Candidates will have one minute and 30 seconds for answers and the opportunity for a closing statement. Follow-ups will be at the discretion of all of us at the table, the moderators. Invoking a candidate’s name or policy does not necessarily mean the mentioned candidate is entitled to a response. We want to caution all the candidates not to interrupt or speak over your fellow debaters. If you talk over each other, the voters can’t hear you. And given the critical issues we’re facing specifically on the world sage, we want everyone to hear every word you have to say, continued interruptions may result in loss of additional questions. And to our audience, please, please hold your applause so that the candidates can be heard.

(03:12)
With that said, let’s have a good debate. All right, our first question, the opening question is one for all of you. Donald Trump is the first ex-president in more than 100 years to [inaudible 00:03:23] popular among Republican primary voters as his legal challenges mount. Governor DeSantis, let me begin with you on this one. Speak to Republican voters who are supporting Donald Trump. why should you and not him be the Republican nominee to face Joe Biden a year from now?

Gov. Ron DeSantis (03:43):

This country is in trouble and the elites that have put us here, they don’t care about you. They don’t care that you’re having to grapple with higher grocery prices or have higher gas prices, they don’t care that your family’s less secure because of the open border that’s allowed drugs and even terrorists to come into this country. Well, I care. I am not going to sit idly by and let this country continue its downward spiral, we need leadership and we need it now. I’ll take the hits, I’ll take the arrows, I’ll take the slayings because ultimately it’s not about me, it’s about you. I will fight for you. I will make sure to lead this country’s revival and I will win for you and your family. Actions speak louder than words. We don’t have time for excuses and it’s not something that we’re going to be able to have all these distractions. As a veteran, I will get the job done.

(04:33)
Now if you look where we are now, it’s a lot different than where we were in 2016 and Donald Trump’s a lot different guy than he was in 2016. He owes it to you to be on this stage and explain why he should get another chance. He should explain why he didn’t have Mexico pay for the border wall, he should explain why he racked up so much debt. He should explain why he didn’t drain the swamp and he said Republicans we’re going to get tired of winning. Well, we saw last night I’m sick of Republicans losing in Florida, I showed how it’s done, one year ago, here we won a historic victory including a massive landside right here in Miami-Dade County, that’s how we have to do it. So I promise you this as the nominee next November, I’ll get the job done and as president I will deliver for you.

Lester Holt (05:19):

Your time is up. Let me turn to Ambassador Haley… Audience. Let me turn to Ambassador Haley, why you and not the former president?

Nikki Haley (05:28):

Well, I think you look at the fact that we’re almost $34 trillion in debt. 60% of Americans are living paycheck to paycheck, 50% of American families can’t afford diapers. One in six American families can’t pay their utility bills. You have parents who are worried about what’s being said or taught to their child in the classroom, there’s no transparency. We have antisemitism all over our college campuses and students feel unsafe. You’ve got an open border where terrorists can come through and we’ve got wars happening all over us and there are dangers around us. Everybody wants to talk about President Trump. Well, I can talk about President Trump. I can tell you that I think he was the right president at the right time. I don’t think he’s the right president now. I think that he put us $8 trillion in debt and our kids are never going to forgive us for that.

(06:18)
I think the fact that he used to be right on Ukraine and foreign issues, now he’s getting weak in the knees and trying to be friendly again. I think that we’ve got to go back to the fact that we can’t live in the past, we can’t live in other headlines. We’ve got to start focusing on what’s going to make America strong and proud. And that’s what I’m focused on doing. Let’s make sure we pay down our debt, I think we need an accountant in the White House. Let’s make sure that we have transparency in the classroom, as a mom, I know what that means. Let’s make sure we secure our borders so that our families are safe. Let’s get crime down because our families want to know that they can be safe no matter where they go. And as the wife of a combat veteran, I will tell you a military needs to know we have their back and we need to make sure that America’s strong.

Lester Holt (07:01):

Ambassador, thank you very much. Let me just caution the audience. Let’s not go down this road, we’ve asked you to please restrain yourselves and would be helpful so we can hear the candidates because these are important issues and the voters want and need to hear them. Mr. Ramaswamy, let me turn to you. Please make your case, why should you be the nominee and not the former president?

Vivek Ramaswamy (07:27):

I think there’s something deeper going on in the Republican Party here and I am upset about what happened last night. We’ve become a party of losers, at the end of the day. We as a cancer the Republican establishment. Let’s speak the truth, I mean since Ronald McDaniel took over as chairwoman of the RNC in 2017, we have lost 2018, 2020, 2022, no red wave that never came, we got trounced last night in 2023. And I think that we have to have accountability in our party for that matter, Ron, if you want to come on stage tonight, you want to look the GOP voters in the eye and tell them you resign. I will turn over my yield, my time to you. And frankly, look the people there cheering for losing in the Republican Party.

(08:08)
Think about whose moderating this debate, this should be Tucker Carlson, Joe Rogan and Elon Musk, we’d have 10 times the viewership asking questions that GOP primary voters actually care about and bringing more people into our party. And we’ve Kristen Welker here, do you think the Democrats would actually hire Greg Gutfeld to host a democratic debate? They wouldn’t do it. And so the fact of the matter is, I mean Kristen, I’m going to use this time, ’cause this is actually about you in the media and the corrupt media establishment. Ask you the Trump Russia collusion hoax that you pushed on this network for years, was that real or was that Hillary Clinton made up disinformation? Answer the question. Go.

Kristen Welker (08:47):

Mr. Ramaswamy-

Lester Holt (08:48):

Sorry-

Vivek Ramaswamy (08:49):

This is how we get our country back. We need accountability because this media rigged the 2016 election, they rigged the 2020 election with a Hunter Biden laptop story, and they’re going to rig this election [inaudible 00:09:01]-

Lester Holt (09:00):

Mr. Ramaswamy, you’re time is up.

Vivek Ramaswamy (09:01):

… accountability, that’s how you unite this country.

Lester Holt (09:02):

Let me turn to Governor Christie, why you… Audience, let’s not do this. Let’s not do this, let’s let the candidates speak. Governor Christie, why you and not former President Trump?

Gov. Chris Christie (09:15):

Well, Lester, look, you said it at the beginning of the debate. We are dealing with extraordinarily important issues facing this country right now. We have our greatest ally in the Middle East under fire from a terrorist group that has committed to wiping them and every Jewish person in this world off the map. We have Ukraine with Vladimir Putin, a communist KGB dictator who wants to put the old band back together, he’s starting in Ukraine and he’s going to move to the Baltics and Poland after that. We have inflation in this country that is choking, choking every American family that wants to try to rise up and give their children a better life. And tonight we need to decide which president’s going to be the one to tackle the big issues? Who’s going to make this country look once again, not just inward, but look outward at the world and say America is the country, the indispensable nation that makes this a safer world? And in a safer world, American innovation, American hard work has always been the thing that has driven our country to greater things.

(10:33)
I’m going to be the President who will do those big things. We’re not going to be small. And I’ll say this about Donald Trump. Anybody who’s going to be spending the next year and a half of their life focusing on keeping themselves out of jail and courtrooms cannot lead this party or this country, and it needs to be said plainly.

Lester Holt (10:47):

All right, Governor, thank you. Let me turn to Senator Scott. Senator Scott, you’ve said former President Trump can’t win. Make your case to Republican voters.

Sen. Tim Scott (10:56):

Well certainly what I would say without any questions that the truth of my life destroys the lies of the radical left. We need a president and a candidate who will actually help our base solidify and attract independent voters into our party. The great opportunity party is now winning back African-American voters and Hispanic voters, because we are working on a foundation based on faith, our nation is facing some deep challenges, it is a loss of faith in this nation that is a part of the erosion that we’re seeing every single day. It’s restoring faith, restoring our Christian values that will help this nation once again become the city on the hill. When Ronald Reagan talked about the city on the hill, he was coming from Matthew five. When President Lincoln talked about a house divided, that was Mark. Our founding documents speak to the importance of a faith foundation. You don’t have to be a Christian for America to work for you, but America does not work without a faith-filled Judeo-Christian foundation.

(12:07)
I would be the President that helps us restore faith in God, faith in each other and faith in our future. Without that focus, none of the issues, the policies matter. We have to get back to being a nation that is in fact the city on the hill that believes in each other enough for us to fight for that future.

Lester Holt (12:30):

Senator Scott, thank you. We’re going to turn now to the challenges facing the next commander-in-chief. You’ll all be fielding questions first from me and the Republican Jewish Coalition and then from Kristen and Hugh. So as we continue forward, the Israel Hamas war is barely a month old, tonight, Israeli troops are fighting inside Gaza City with over 200 hostages who remain captive there and civilian casualties mount inside Gaza. As President of the United States, what would you be urging Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu to do at this moment? Governor DeSantis.

Gov. Ron DeSantis (13:06):

I would be telling Bibi, finish the job once and for all with these butchers, Hamas, their terrorists, their massacring innocent people. They would wipe every Jew off the globe if they could. He cannot live with that threat right by his country. That Hamas should release every hostage and they should unconditionally surrender. I’m sick of hearing the media, I’m sick of hearing other people blame Israel just for defending itself. We will stand with Israel in word and indeed in public and in private. And I can tell you as governor, I actually did something about it. Biden’s neglect has been atrocious, we had Floridians that were over there after the attack. He left them stranded. They couldn’t get flights out. So I scrambled resources in Florida. I sent planes over to Israel and I brought back over 700 people to safety. There could have been more hostages had we not acted.

(14:01)
And I’ll tell you this, I met the first planeload when they came to Florida and one of the mothers pointed to a six-year-old daughter. And she said, “My daughter had been saying the last two nights, mommy, I don’t want to hear any more bombs, no more rockets. I just want to get back to Florida.” So there’s a difference between words and deeds, we acted and we save lives.

Lester Holt (14:21):

Thank you. Ambassador Haley, what would you do? What would you be urging Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to do? Would you consider humanitarian pause for example?

Nikki Haley (14:29):

The first thing I said to him when it happened was I said, finish them. Finish them. And the reason is I worked on this every day when I was at the United Nations and we have to remember that they have to one, eliminate Hamas, two support Israel with whatever they need, whenever they need it. And three, make sure we bring our hostages home. We need to be very clear-eyed to know there would be no Hamas without Iran, there would be no Hezbollah without Iran. There would not be the Houthis without Iran and there wouldn’t be the Iranian militias in Syria and Iraq that are trying to hit our military men and women if it hadn’t been for Iran. And who is funding Iran, right now? China is buying oil from Iran, Russia is getting drones and missiles from Iran and there is an unholy alliance. We need to be clear-eyed. The last thing we need to do is to tell Israel what to do. The only thing we should be doing is supporting them in eliminating Hamas.

(15:25)
It is not that Israel needs America, America needs Israel. They are the tip of the spear when it comes to this Islamic terrorism and we need to make sure that we have their backs in that process.

Lester Holt (15:38):

All right, thank you. Mr. Ramaswamy, any daylight between you and the candidates we just heard in this issue on what you would tell the Prime Minister?

Vivek Ramaswamy (15:46):

In terms of what I would tell the Prime Minister, no. In fact I would go one step further, the founding vision of Israel was based on the idea that they don’t want to depend on anybody else’s sympathy or direction in defending themselves. So what I would tell Bibi is that Israel has the right and the responsibility to defend itself. I would tell him to smoke those terrorists on his southern border and then I’ll tell him as President of the United States, I’ll be smoking the terrorists on our southern border. That’s his responsibility, this is our responsibility. That’s how we move forward. But I want to be careful to avoid making the mistakes from the NeoCon establishment of the past. Corrupt politicians in both parties spent trillions, killed millions, made billions for themselves in places like Iraq and Afghanistan, fighting wars that sent 1000s of our sons and daughters, people my age to die in wars that did not advance anyone’s interests. Adding $7 trillion to our national debt.

(16:40)
And Joe Biden sold off our foreign policy. Joe Biden’s son, Hunter Biden got a $5 million bribe from Ukraine, that’s why we’re sending $200 billion back to that same country. The fact of the matter is the Republican Party is not that much better. You have the likes of Nikki Haley who stepped down from her time at the UN, bankrupt or in debt was her family. Then she becomes a military contractor, she joins the board of Boeing and otherwise and is now a multi-millionaire. So I think that that’s wrong when Republicans do it or Democrats do it. That’s the choice we face. Do you want a leader from a different generation who’s going to put this country first or do you want Dick Cheney in three inch heels? In which case, we’ve got two of them on stage tonight.

Lester Holt (17:16):

All right, Mr. Ramaswamy, thank you. Senator Scott?

Sen. Tim Scott (17:21):

Yes.

Lester Holt (17:22):

Senator, same question to you about, you’re the president, you’re on the phone of the Oval Office with the Prime Minister, you tell him what?

Sen. Tim Scott (17:28):

Well, number one, I would tell Prime Minister Netanyahu, not only do you have the responsibility and the right to wipe Hamas off of the map, we will support you, we will be there with you, we’ll stand shoulder to shoulder. There will be no daylight. But I would change the station a little bit though and head back home to America. I would say to President Biden, diplomacy only is a weak strategy, appeasement leads to war. From President Obama to President Biden, Obama sent millions to Iran, frankly, president Biden has hit billions to Iran. That is why I said that there’s blood dripping from the hands of President Obama and President Biden. I would tell President Biden with great clarity, if you want to stop the 40 plus attacks on military personnel in the Middle East, you have to strike in Iran. If you want to make a difference. You cannot just continue to have strikes in Syria on warehouses, you actually have to cut off the head of the snake and the head of the snake is Iran and not simply their proxies.

(18:42)
In order for us to have a powerful response from America, we have to be in a position of strength. As President of the United States, my foreign policy is simple, you cannot negotiate with evil, you have to destroy it.

Lester Holt (18:57):

All right, Senator Scott, thank you. Governor Christie, I want to get you to weigh in here.

Gov. Chris Christie (19:02):

Look Lester, these problems are so big and serious that the first thing I would say to Prime Minister Netanyahu is pretty simple, America is here no matter what it is you need at any time to preserve the state of Israel. Remember that Hamas’ main goal is to get rid of Israel. Is to get Israel absolutely off the map, now there are three things I think I would say to him when he asked for advice. The first I would say is that it is absolutely your obligation to protect the territorial integrity of Israel. Secondly, to make sure you protect the security and the safety of your people. Every time something happens to compromise either one of those things, it creates greater unrest in the entire region.

(19:48)
Second, you must go in and make sure that Hamas can never do this again. The fact is that Israel and their intelligence community failed. They failed here and they failed the people of the state of Israel. And so we need to work closely and better together to make sure one, that they’re degraded and two, that we know everything that’s going on inside the Gaza Strip when it’s going on so that something like this can’t happen to kill 1400 individuals again. And the third thing is to keep your eye on the ball, make sure that we continue to isolate Iran, work with the reasonable nations in the Middle East, the other Arab nations who want to partner with you and make sure that we continue to isolate Iran so that their only friends in the world are the part of the evil foursome, China we Russia, Iran, and North Korea.

Lester Holt (20:35):

Governor Christie, thank you very much and we’re going to continue in this vein right now with a question from Matthew Brooks, the CEO of the Republican Jewish Coalition, a partner of the Republican National Committee in this debate, here it is.

Matthew Brooks (20:49):

Given attacks by Iranian backed proxy groups on US military bases in Syria and Iraq, attacks that have wounded approximately two dozen of our US servicemen. Do you support the use of military force by the United States against Iran?

Lester Holt (21:07):

Governor Haley, would you please answer that?

Nikki Haley (21:08):

Yes, I’d first like to say they’re five-inch heels and I don’t wear them unless you can run in them.

Vivek Ramaswamy (21:13):

Well, we’ve got two of you on stage-

Lester Holt (21:13):

[inaudible 00:21:17].

Nikki Haley (21:19):

The second thing that I’ll say is I wear heels, they’re not for a fashion statement, they’re for ammunition. What we need to be doing for Iraq and Syria is first of all, the idea that our men and women could be targeted and that we’ve allowed almost 100 hits to happen under Biden’s watch is unthinkable. We need to understand this is Iran giving the green light telling them what to do and we shouldn’t be doing the tit for tat like what Joe Biden has done. We need to go and take out their infrastructure that they are using to make those strikes with so they can never do it again. Iran responds to strength, you punch them one and you punch them hard and they will back off. But what we don’t need is Biden falling all over himself to get back in the Iran deal. Him giving $6 billion to get five hostages home, him telling Netanyahu now that he needs a pause or a ceasefire. We don’t need him going and sitting there tiptoeing around Iran because he thinks they’re going to do something.

(22:16)
You don’t respond to an enemy and a terrorist with fear, you respond with strength. When you do that, that’s when the world pays attention and that’s when Iran stops.

Lester Holt (22:27):

Thank you. Governor DeSantis, if I can continue with you. Just today the US launched another one of its limited airstrikes against targets in Syria this time Iranian linked facility, how far would you go militarily to hold Iran accountable?

Gov. Ron DeSantis (22:42):

Well first Matt, thanks for your question and I appreciate what you’ve done over the last month. I know it’s been very difficult for the community and appreciate you guys rallying together in difficult times. I actually served in Iraq back in the day and we had Al-Qaeda in Iraq, you had Shia militias that were funded by Iran that were killing 100s and 100s of US troops. And as commander-in-chief, I am not going to put our troops in harm’s way unless you’re willing to defend them with everything you have. Biden has a out there, they’re sitting ducks, he’s doing glancing blows, that’s just inviting more attacks from the Iranians. I would say you harm a hair on the head of an American service member and you are going to have hell to pay. We are not just going to sit there and let our service members be sitting ducks. And that’s true whether it’s Iran or whether it’s any country on the world. We have to be strong and we have to defend the people who defend us.

Lester Holt (23:42):

All right, thank you, Governor. Now our second and final question from Matthew Brooks of the Republican Jewish Coalition. Please watch.

Matthew Brooks (23:52):

Jewish students across the country are threatened and under attack. What do you say to Jewish students on college campuses who feel unsafe given the dramatic rise in antisemitism? And what do you to say to university presidents and college presidents who have not met the moral clarity moment to forcefully condemn Hamas terrorism?

Lester Holt (24:14):

Mr. Ramaswamy, would you like to take that one?

Vivek Ramaswamy (24:16):

Absolutely. I think the scourge of antisemitism across this country, including at places like my Alma Maters and places like Brooklyn Bridge in New York, it’s sad to see, but here’s what history teaches us. Antisemitism is a symptom of a deeper cancer in a country, in a society that is lost and we are lost. Several years ago when I wrote my first book, Woke Inc. I was talking about there were chanting death to America, death to white people, death to Christians, nobody was waking up back then. Now it’s even bad now they’re saying death to Israel and worse. So it is wrong, but we have to get to the root cause here. Now, I think it’s really important that we do this through leadership, not censorship. Leadership means fill that void with purpose and meaning, dilute this wokeism and antisemitism to irrelevance These kids, they have no idea what the heck they’re even talking about when they’re siding with Hamas over Israel, they are fools.

(25:09)
But I also want to caution here, if we go the direction of Ron DeSantis or Nikki Haley, with whom I respectfully disagree on this issue, pro-censorship telling student groups to disband, mark my words soon they will say, if you question a vaccine and its side effects, you’re a bio-terrorist soon, they will say that if you show up at a school board meeting, you’re a domestic terrorist soon. If they say that J6 prisoners should be released, you’re an insurrectionist terrorist. So that’s where this road ends. We don’t quash this with censorship because that creates a worse underbelly, we quell it through leadership by calling it out. These university administrators have lost their way and we need leadership at the top in the United States of America that restores our founding values and that has no place for this kind of anti-Semitic hate. That’s where I stand while respecting our constitution.

Lester Holt (25:57):

Your time is up. Senator Scott, let me get you to weigh in on what you just heard.

Sen. Tim Scott (26:01):

Well, let me just say to every single university president in America, federal funding is a privilege, not a right, number one. Number two, to every student who’ve come to our country on a visa to a college campus, your visa is a privilege, not a right. Number three, any campus that allows for antisemitism and hate, to allow students to encourage terrorism, mass murder and genocide, you should lose your federal funding today, period. To all the students on visas who are encouraging Jewish genocide, I would deport you from those campuses. We have to stand strong with our Jewish Americans. At the end of the day, we should not have our Jewish students in a library being told to hide on our streets in New York, a US citizen has the right to walk on the streets of America with no fear. They have the right to go to college campuses, go to class and not fear. We will restore that. I started working on antisemitism on college campuses in 2017 because even then there was a rise of antisemitism on college campuses, we must force the people off those campuses and frankly-

Lester Holt (27:34):

Senator Scott, thank you. Let me-

Sen. Tim Scott (27:35):

… out of our country.

Lester Holt (27:36):

Let me turn to the governor DeSantis here. What do you think about what he just said?

Gov. Ron DeSantis (27:40):

I was the first presidential candidate to say if you are here on a suit and visa as a foreign national, you’re making common cause with Hamas, I’m canceling your visa and I’m sending you home, no questions asked. Second, I have friends here in Florida who their kids do not feel safe even going to university campus at all, outside of the state of Florida. You have Jewish students fleeing for their lives at Cooper Union. Joe Biden should have the Department of Justice on these college campuses and holding the universities accountable for civil rights violations, you should not have money going to these places. I already acted in Florida, we had a group students for Justice of Palestine. They said they are common cause with Hamas. They said, we’re not just in solidarity, this is what we are. We deactivated them. We’re not going to use state tax dollars to fund jihad, no way.

(28:33)
And what is Biden doing? Not only is he not helping the Jewish students who are being persecuted, he is launching an initiative to combat, so-called Islamophobia? No, it’s the antisemitism that’s spiraling out of control. That is what we have to confront. And as president, I can tell you this, we are not going to stand for this on college campuses any longer.

Lester Holt (28:55):

All right, Governor, thank you. Let me turn to Governor Christie and considering what he just said, you led a state with a sizable Muslim population last month. As you know, a 6-year-old Palestinian American boy was killed in Illinois by his landlord. His mother was also stabbed more than a dozen times in what has been charged as a hate crime. What do you say to Muslim Americans who are also feeling afraid for their safety, right now?

Gov. Chris Christie (29:19):

Lester, I’m the only one in the state who’s actually had experience in dealing with this. I was appointed by President Bush to be the US attorney in New Jersey on September 10th, 2001. And when I took over that job after the September 11th attacks, I had to deal with a situation in our state that was explosive. We’re the most ethically diverse state in this country. And so first, we heard credible reports about Jewish students and synagogues being threatened in our state in the aftermath of 9/11. We made sure that we sent federal agents to those synagogues and we protected them and the same thing should be being done now.

Gov. Chris Christie (30:00):

At the very same time, I personally went from mosque to mosque in New Jersey and met with the leaders of those mosques and with the members of the mosques and I said, “The law enforcement is on your side to protect you regardless of your religion if you are going to comply with the law.” And we developed fabulous relationships with Muslim Americans all across the state of New Jersey and we stopped any hate crimes that were going on either against Jewish Americans in New Jersey or Muslim Americans in New Jersey. It takes leadership, Lester, to know how to do this. You must work with both sides. Both sides need to know it, but let us never have a false moral equivalence between Hamas and Hezbollah and the Jewish people. The Jewish people stand for right and justice and Hamas and Hezbollah stand for death.

Lester Holt (30:52):

Senator Christie, thank you. Ambassador Haley, what do you say to Americans who are simply afraid right now in this current environment that we’re talking about?

Nikki Haley (31:01):

I think you look at the country and the country is all out of sorts. I think look at what these kids are dealing with on college campuses. What makes me so angry is not only do you have the kids barricaded in the library, they said they were going to shoot up the kosher dining hall. You’ve got kids dorm rooms who are being set on fire because they have something related to Israel on their doors. No person should ever feel in danger like this. And this is what I would say about our college presidents is if the KKK were doing this, every college president would be up in arms. This is no different. You should treat it exactly the same. Antisemitism is just as awful as racism and we’ve got to make sure they’re protected.

(31:46)
And for everybody that’s protesting on these college campuses in favor of Hamas, let me remind you something. Hamas said, “Death to Israel and death to America.” They hate and would kill you too. And the idea that they’re talking about genocide for the Jewish people, that’s not the values of America. That’s not us. We’re better than that. We don’t need to celebrate terrorists, we don’t need to celebrate genocide. We don’t need to celebrate violence towards anybody. We need to go back and soul search in our country and remember what we are about and we are about taking care of people, not going and making them live in fear because some other terrorist activity says they want to destroy them.

Lester Holt (32:27):

Ambassador, thank you. Kristen.

Kristen (32:29):

Lester, thank you. This is another question for the entire field so you’ll all get a chance to respond, but Senator Scott, I’d like to start with you. The United States has given Ukraine financial and military support since the war began more than 600 days ago. President Zelensky told me on Sunday, if Russia isn’t stopped now, “The price will be higher for the United States,” and Americans would be forced to “send your sons and daughters to defend NATO countries.” Senator Scott, where do you stand on more funding for Ukraine?

Sen. Tim Scott (33:02):

I certainly have been very supportive of Ukraine. I believe that ultimately we should make sure that the President of the United States states what is America’s national vital interest in Ukraine. It is actually in degrading the Russian military. We’ve been very effective using our resources and our weaponry and the incredibly high price of Ukrainian blood to achieve that objective. Every day we get closer to the degradation of the Russian military, and that’s good news. But the American people are frustrated that they do not have a president who reminds us and tells us, where’s the accountability? How are those dollars being spent? We need those answers for us to continue to see the support for Ukraine.

(33:46)
And at the same time, I would say that a package that’s been offered by the president for Ukraine and Israel, that’s the wrong approach. We need to focus specifically on providing Israel with the $14 billion that they need so that we show the world that we are 100% undeniably standing shoulder to shoulder with Israel. And then as we turn away from that direct support for Israel, we should go to our southern border and close our southern border with the resources necessary. I believe that we have sleeper terrorist cells in America. Thousands of people have come from Yemen, Iran, Syria, and Iraq. If we are going to deal with the national security emergency at our border, we have to do it now.

Kristen (34:35):

Senator Scott, thank you. But just to be very clear, if you were president, if you were in the Oval Office today, would you sign off on more military funding for Ukraine or would you discontinue it?

Sen. Tim Scott (34:46):

Bottom line is we have to first have the level of accountability that allows the American people to understand where the resources have gone, number one. Number two, after we have that responsibility taken care of and accountability, then we have an opportunity to look at the overall strategy that helps us to grade the Russian military while we use our resources. And frankly, keeping our NATO partners safe from the Russian military is absolutely essential. As you understand, Article 5 would require to support and to defend NATO, our troops in the ground. The fastest way for us to eliminate that possibility is for us to destroy possible the Russian military. By doing so, we actually achieve the objective of keeping our military home, and that’s good news.

Kristen (35:34):

Thank you, Senator Scott. Mr. Ramaswamy, are you persuaded by President Zelensky’s urgent new plea? Where do you stand on more funding?

Vivek Ramaswamy (35:40):

I’m absolutely unpersuaded and I’m actually enjoying watching the Ukraine hawks quietly, delicately tiptoe back from their position as this thing has unwound into a disaster. The first half of this race, I was the only person standing for it. Now, they’re actually quietly coming around to being more cautious as they should. Level with the American people here. Ukraine is not a paragon of democracy. This is a country that has banned 11 opposition parties. It has consolidated all media into one state TV media arm. That’s not democratic. It has threatened not to hold elections this year unless the U.S. forks over more money. That is not democratic. It has celebrated a Nazi in its ranks, the comedian in cargo pants, a man called Zelensky. Doing it in their own ranks, that is not democratic.

(36:23)
More facts for you that you won’t hear from the mainstream in either party or the mainstream media. The regions of Ukraine that are occupied by Russia right now, the Donbass, Luhansk, Donetsk, these are Russian-speaking regions that have not even been part of Ukraine since 2014, that other people probably couldn’t name those provinces for you. Those are the hard facts. And so to frame this as some kind of battle between good versus evil, don’t buy it. And I’d like the likes of the sharpest of the war hawks on Ukraine, Nikki Haley, to have some accountability and answer. Do you want to use U.S. taxpayer money to fund the banning of Christians? That is actually what’s happening. They’re using the Ukrainian Orthodox Church. They have banned them. The Ukrainian Parliament just did this last week supported by our dollars, and I think you owe it to the American people, Nikki, to at least this one time condemn-

Kristen (37:14):

Mr. Ramaswamy, thank you. That’s time.

Vivek Ramaswamy (37:14):

… at least to condemn their banning of Christians.

Kristen (37:17):

Mr. Ramaswamy, thank you.

Vivek Ramaswamy (37:18):

[inaudible 00:37:19] talking on both sides [inaudible 00:37:19].

Kristen (37:18):

Mr. Ramaswamy, thank you. We ask the questions. Ambassador Haley-

Vivek Ramaswamy (37:22):

Well, she deserves to answer.

Kristen (37:23):

… what is your take on more funding for Ukraine?

Nikki Haley (37:28):

I’m telling you Putin and President Xi are salivating at the thought that someone like that could become president. They would love to see that.

Vivek Ramaswamy (37:36):

The fact of the matter is she doesn’t answer the question.

Nikki Haley (37:38):

So this is what I will tell you is first of all let’s remember-

Vivek Ramaswamy (37:38):

We’re driving Russia into China’s hands because of these foolish policies.

Kristen (37:39):

Mr. Ramaswamy, you had your time to talk. The ambassador has the floor. Ambassador, please.

Nikki Haley (37:45):

Thank you. The first thing I’ll tell you is we all remember what that thug did when he invaded Ukraine. We all know that half a million people have died because of Putin, and here is a freedom loving, pro-American country that is fighting for its survival and its democracy. No, I don’t think we should give them cash. I think we should give them the equipment and the ammunition to win. And I’ll tell you, if Biden had done it when they first asked for it, this war would be over.

(38:13)
But let’s also remember this. When you left Afghanistan in shambles and left them with a ton of weapons and money, it’s not that we left, it’s how we left. When you look at Ukraine, don’t think for a second, now everybody wants to move away from Ukraine, they’ll want to move away from Israel a year from now. America can never be so arrogant to think we don’t need friends. After 9/11, we needed a lot of friends. Now is the time to get partnerships. This unholy alliance between Russia, Ukraine and China is real. There is a reason the Taiwanese want us to support the Ukrainians. It’s because they know that China’s coming after them next. There is a reason Ukrainians want us to support Israelis because they know that if Iran wins, Russia wins. We have to see the combination of the three.

Kristen (39:00):

Ambassador, thank you. Governor Christie, what is your take and how long should Americans be expected to help fund the war in Ukraine?

Gov. Chris Christie (39:10):

Kristen, let’s remember the last time that we turned our back on a shooting war in Europe. It bought us just a couple of years and then 500,000 Americans were killed in Europe to defeat Hitler. This is not a choice. This is the price we pay for being the leaders of the free world. And the fact is this alliance is not just with Russia and China. Governor Haley knows this. Iran is in the middle of this as well, and so is North Korea and they are all working to support Russia right now. And the reason they’re doing it is because dictators work together. People who believe in democracy work together. We must stand with all of those that are standing up for democracy and freedom in this world.

(39:55)
And by the way, let’s remind everybody of this. In 1992, this country made a promise to Ukraine. We said if you return nuclear missiles that were part of the old Soviet Union to Russia and they invade you, we will protect you. An American promise that’s 31 years old is no different than American promise that’s made tonight on this stage. We need to stand by it. And those of us who forget history are doomed to repeat it.

Vivek Ramaswamy (40:22):

I’d like to respond.

Gov. Chris Christie (40:25):

And the absolute, the absolute giving in to dictators, which is being suggested on this stage just shows the immaturity of the approach.

Vivek Ramaswamy (40:37):

I’d like to respond to that.

Kristen (40:37):

Governor Christie, thank you. Governor DeSantis, I’d like you to weigh in on this idea. Are you concerned that this could become a wider war if Putin is not stopped now?

Gov. Ron DeSantis (40:46):

Well, any suggestion by Zelensky or anyone else that we’re going to eventually have U.S. troops there, I can tell the American people when I’m president, that will not happen. We are not going to send your sons and daughters to Ukraine. I am going to send troops to our southern border. If you look at the threats that we face, terrorists have come in through our southern border. I’m going to shut it down. I’m going to have the military and I’m going to deport the people who’ve come, particularly under Biden, who’ve come from the Middle East, come from all these places.

(41:11)
Now, Biden wants $105 billion. 60, most of that’s Ukraine, including some of it going to pay pensions for bureaucrats and salaries. That is a totally ridiculous use of American tax dollars. He says he has money for border to try to do, and the media repeat that. When you look at it, what most of the money is money to process more illegal aliens into this country. How is that solving the problem? That’s making the problem worse. And what does he do for the Indo-Pacific? A pittance. That is the top threat that we face. We need to bring this war to an end. We need the Europeans to step up and do their fair share and we need to get serious about the top threat that this country faces, which is the Chinese Communist Party.

Kristen (41:54):

Thank you, Governor. Thank you.

Vivek Ramaswamy (41:56):

If I may respond to the Ukraine question.

Hugh Hewitt (41:56):

In fact, we are going to go from the hot wars in Ukraine and Gaza and Israel to what many people are calling the new Cold War with China. And I remind the audience that it’s important for our visitors at home to be able to hear you and especially for the people in Beijing to hear you. Many Republicans believe that the Chinese Communist Party and General Secretary Xi is an existential threat to the United States. The flashpoint is Taiwan. For decades and decades, the American military, but primarily the United States Navy has deterred an attack from China to the island state of Taiwan, that Ronald Reagan’s navy of 600 ships is gone. Now the question to you is, and I’ll start with you Ambassador Haley, because you were in President Trump’s cabinet, his goal was a 355 ship Navy. That’s what he pushed for. He got to 300, it’s now at 291. Is that big enough to deter and if necessary, defeat an invasion of Taiwan?

Nikki Haley (42:51):

China has the largest naval fleet in the world. They have 350 ships. They’ll have 400 ships in two years. We won’t even have 350 ships in two decades. China has built up their military. It’s not just land, air, and sea. They’re doing cyber, they’re doing artificial intelligence, they’re doing space. America needs to modernize our military. We need to do everything we can. The first thing is you go and you make sure you have the backs of Ukraine. That’s why the Taiwanese want us to support Ukraine because they know that sends the biggest message to China.

(43:22)
The second thing is we go to China and we start being tough on them. No more sales of our American soil to China and let’s take back what they’ve already stolen. Then you go to the universities. No more having millions of dollars go to our universities. Then we will go and end all formal trade relations with China until they stop murdering Americans from fentanyl, something Ron has yet to say that he’s going to do. And then we modernize our military. When we strengthen our military, when we modernize it with the focus of cyber, artificial intelligence, and space, when we make sure that we have the backs of our friends, whether it’s in Israel, whether it’s in Ukraine, and we should be arming Taiwan. Make sure they have the equipment they need, make sure they have the training they need now. There is nothing China fears more than knowing that America will have Taiwan’s back. Let’s make sure that we show it by making sure they have the equipment they need.

Hugh Hewitt (44:16):

Governor DeSantis, my question is specifically about the Navy. It’s at 291. It’s going to go down perhaps as low as 280. Is it enough? And what would you build if you were going to build more?

Gov. Ron DeSantis (44:26):

Not enough. We have to have the ability to back up a strategy of denial of President Xi’s ambitions. And if China’s able to be the world’s leading superpower that will affect you and your family in ways that are going to be very bad. They will export authoritarianism all around the world as the cost of doing business. They will impose things like social credit scores and internet monitoring. So this is to this generation what the Soviet Union was to the post-World War II generation. I’ve already released a plan. We’re going to get to 355 ships at the end of the first term, 385 ships at the end of the second term, but we’re going to have a path to 600 ships over the next 20 years.

(45:04)
I think the future of freedom is going to be determined in the Indo-Pacific. We have a strategy, not just military, but decoupling from the economy and fighting them here at home with our cultural. Ambassador Haley said somehow I wasn’t doing. She welcomed them into South Carolina, gave them land near a military base, wrote the Chinese ambassador a love letter saying what a great friend they were. That was like their number one way to do economic development. In Florida, I banned China from buying land in this state and we kicked out on our universities and we kicked the Confucius institutes out of our universities. We’ve recognized the threat and we’ve acted swiftly and decisively.

Hugh Hewitt (45:42):

Senator Scott, you’ve been in the Congress since 2011. Defense spending has fallen over that entire period of time. Where are we going to get the money and what would you build and what kind of ships to deter China from attacking Taiwan?

Sen. Tim Scott (45:55):

Well, two major problems with the question. Number one, we do not have currently a defense industrial bank to allow us to have the kind of production that we need in order to keep America safe. Frankly, if we are not prepared to fight and engage in three continents at the same time, think about where we are today. In the Middle East, we are in the midst of trying to back our strongest ally. In Eastern Europe, we’ve seen our resources and our weaponry help degrade the Russian military. The Indo-Pacific, we have real challenges. The long-term threat, the long-term threat is China. Immediate threat is our southern border.

(46:33)
In order for us to have the military to fight three different continents at the exact same time, we are going to have to invest heavily in our military, but we’re also going to have to invest heavily in an industrial base so that we can hit our objectives from a military perspective, not only with our ships, but also with our planes. We are so old as a military that in order for us to recalibrate, we’re going to have to invest. One of the things I do in my Made in America strategy is we create more than 4 million new jobs by having high-tech manufacturing come back to America, decoupling from China so that we focus our attention on creating that industrial revolution that will be necessary for us to achieve the goal of having a military that is ready to be lethal and come home safely.

Hugh Hewitt (47:26):

Thank you, Senator. Mr. Ramaswamy, I’m looking for specifics. What would you build? Where would you build it? When would they be in the water? How big would the fleet get?

Vivek Ramaswamy (47:34):

First answer is end the toxic divest to invest program. For people who don’t know about that, we’re decommissioning ships in the South China Sea. The foundation of war is economics. Rebuild our defense industrial base at home. But here’s the dirty little secret. Our actual defense industrial base depends on China for the supply chain, for the F-35 jets, for the ships that we’re building. Think about this, why are we stockpiling that if it isn’t to actually be strong against our enemy, China? We depend on them for that, just like we depend on them for pharmaceuticals, just like we depend on them for semiconductors. So here’s why we can’t get tough with China. It’s because we depend on them for our modern way of life and we have to declare economic independence from our enemy.

(48:18)
That’s the Declaration of Independence that Thomas Jefferson at the age of 33 would’ve signed. And today if you were alive, that’s the Declaration of Independence that I will sign as the next president. I do have to recognize that Ron DeSantis was correct about acknowledging Nikki Haley’s tough talk when she was ambassador to the UN, calling China our great friend, bringing the CCP to South Carolina. What he left out though, Ron, and be honest about it, there was a lobbying based exemption in that bill that allowed Chinese nationals to buy land within a 20-mile radius of a military base lobbied for by one of your donors. So I think we have to call a spade a spade. We need politicians who are independent of the forces that increase our dependence on China.

(48:56)
My message to Xi Jinping is this, you are done buying land in this country. You will not donate to universities in this country. U.S. businesses won’t expand into the Chinese market until you play by the same set of rules.

Hugh Hewitt (49:06):

Mr. Ramaswamy, quick follow up-

Vivek Ramaswamy (49:06):

You’re kicked out of the WTO and you actually have to have accountability for the COVID-19 pandemic financially, which unleashed hell on the world. We have to hold them accountable.

Hugh Hewitt (49:16):

Mr. Ramaswamy, do you have a number and a plan?

Vivek Ramaswamy (49:20):

I think that we need to increase our naval capacity by at least 20% over the course of the next several years and be able to meet our AUKUS agreement standards. Right now, we are at risk of not even being able to meet our AUKUS standards with Australia and the UK. So what we need to do is have a plan that reverses the trajectory of the divest to invest program by 20% over the next three years.

Hugh Hewitt (49:43):

Governor Christie?

Gov. Chris Christie (49:45):

My first observation, Hugh, is that nobody answers [inaudible 00:49:49]. And my second observation is these three in the middle think they’re the enemy. I know China is the enemy and that’s what we should be focused on. So let’s be really clear. The nuclear submarines in this United States Navy is the greatest deterrent to Chinese aggression, and that is the first place I would go to increase American naval power. Our nuclear submarines are able to move stealthily, quietly, and effectively. And if we are going to deter China from invading Taiwan, the only way we’re going to do it is to make sure that they don’t know whether how many nuclear submarines from the United States of America are in the South China Sea and in that area and ready to strike on them if they decide to move on Taiwan.

(50:30)
And so we as our first priority, need to go directly to our nuclear sub-program, Hugh, and we need to increase it drastically. That would be priority number one. Ships would come next, but to me the ships are secondary choice here. The submarines are the single most important thing that we could be using to deter China. But the other thing we could do to deter China is to let them know that the blood money they’re spending for Russia in Ukraine right now will not be effective. That we send Putin home with his tail between his legs and make them understand that the same fate waits for them if they decide to move towards Taiwan with a more aggressive nuclear subprogram, we’ll be able to make that threat real.

Hugh Hewitt (51:12):

Thank you, Governor. We’re going to take a brief pause now and we’ll be back to the Republican Presidential Primary Debate. Please stay tuned.

Advertisement 2 (51:25):

Insight, Former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan warned us when he said, “Deficit spending is simply a scheme for the confiscation of wealth.” He’s right. Deficit spending can cause inflation, which eats away at your savings even if you don’t see it at first. Is there a solution? Yes.

(51:42)
Greenspan thought so when he said, “Gold stands in the way of this insidious process.” This is where Birch Gold Group comes in. You see, Greenspan understood that true wealth preservation can come from physical assets like gold. We’ve helped Americans diversify their IRA or 401(k) into gold for over 20 years. To get a free info kit from Birch Gold, text NOW to 989898 now. This is our gift to you. There’s no obligation and nothing to buy, just free info to help you diversify your hard-earned savings. Text NOW to 989898 right now.

Kevin Sorbo (52:20):

Do you owe over $10,000 in back taxes? Kevin Sorbo here with an important message. The Biden administration has proposed an $80 billion plan to boost IRS collections. This means they could garnish your wages, levy your bank account, and even seize your property. Tax Network USA, a trusted tax firm can help protect your income and assets today while quickly settling your tax debt. But you have to act now while you still have options. Call Tax Network USA today.

Advertisement 4 (52:52):

At Consumer Cellular, we offer amazing 5G coverage, backed up by incredible customer service. But that wouldn’t mean much without super low prices. You already know we’re up to half as much as the largest carriers, but guess what? AARP members can save even more.

Speaker 2 (53:07):

Yahoo! Uh-oh.

Speaker 3 (53:11):

Switch to Consumer Cellular now and get unlimited talk and text with a flexible data plan starting at only $20 a month.

Lester Holt (53:34):

And welcome back to tonight’s NBC News Republican Presidential Debate. Once again, here’s Hugh Hewitt.

Hugh Hewitt (53:39):

Thank you, Lester. We’re going to stay on China and we’re going to talk specifically about TikTok. Last week, Congressman Mike Gallagher, who is chairman of the House Bipartisan Select Committee on the Chinese Communist Party, published a long essay on TikTok following the flooding of pro Hamas propaganda under TikTok accounts across the United States. Chairman Gallagher called it, “Shocking.” He called the app, “Predatory, controlled by America’s preeminent adversary, one used to push propaganda and divide America, its spyware,” he said, “A means of surveillance.” Governor Christie, do you agree with Chairman Gallagher? And if so, would you ban or force the sale of TikTok?

Gov. Chris Christie (54:17):

I agree 100% with Chairman Gallagher. And let me say this, TikTok is not only spyware, it is polluting the minds of American young people all throughout this country and they’re doing it intentionally. And when you saw what happened in the last few weeks with all of this anti-Semitic, horrible stuff that their algorithms were pushing out at a gargantuan rate, this is China trying to further divide the United States of America. And this is one of the big failings among many of the Trump administration. He talked tough about TikTok. I heard him do it many times, but when it came down to it, he did not ban them when he could have and should have. And now since then, we’ve had an additional nearly six years of this type of poison be put out throughout the United States, even putting aside the spine, which we know is going on in the theft of American personal data and information.

(55:21)
So in my first week as president, we would ban TikTok. They want to go ahead and sell it, let them go ahead and sell it. But I’ll tell you another reason we would do it. Facebook’s not in China, X is not in China. They’re not permitting a free flow of information to the Chinese people from our social media companies, yet we just open the door and let them do what they’re doing. TikTok should be banned because they are poisoning American minds and I would do it week one.

Hugh Hewitt (55:50):

Thank you, Governor. I want to go to Governor DeSantis. Would you ban or force the sale of TikTok regardless of whether or not China allowed American apps to operate in China?

Gov. Ron DeSantis (56:00):

Yes, I think that China’s the top threat we face. They’ve been very effective at infiltrating different parts of our society. So my policy on China and the Chinese Communist Party is very simple, we win, they lose. And in order to do that, it’s not just military, it’s economic and it’s cultural. And as the dad of a six, five, and a three-year-old, I’m concerned about the data that they’re getting from our young people and what they’re doing to pollute the minds of our young people. These kids get these devices and they have a mind of their own. And I know a lot of parents are looking, it’s hard to even keep it out. China’s obviously the most extreme, but this is happening with other things. So we are going to do that and we are going to make sure to protect the American people. It’s a full spectrum approach to be able to fend China off. Yes, military deterrence, yes, economic decoupling, but also their role in our culture. If we ignore that, we’re not going to be able to win the fight.

Hugh Hewitt (56:57):

Thank you, Governor. Ambassador Haley, speak to the parents out there. There are probably TikTok apps on half the phones in this auditorium.

Nikki Haley (57:03):

No, I’m going to speak to the fact that two people hit me and you didn’t let me respond. So let’s first talk about the fact that they want to talk about the Chinese land from 10 years ago. Yes, I brought a fiberglass company 10 years ago to South Carolina. But Ron, you are the chair of your economic development agency that as of last week said Florida is the ideal place for Chinese businesses. Not only that, you have a company that is manufacturer of Chinese military planes. You have it. They are expanding two training sites at two of your airports now, one which is 12 miles away from a naval base. Then you have another company that’s expanding and they were just invaded by the Department of Homeland Security. So mine was 10 years ago-

Gov. Ron DeSantis (57:50):

You gave them stuff, I didn’t give them anything.

Nikki Haley (57:51):

… yours was six months ago. What’s your story?

Gov. Ron DeSantis (57:53):

And I abolished that agency that she’s talking about. Enterprise Florida, we abolished it and of course we banned China from buying land.

Nikki Haley (58:01):

He scrubbed the website last week. Go check.

Gov. Ron DeSantis (58:03):

Not exactly a great recruiting pitch if you’re banning them from purchasing land. So we stood up [inaudible 00:58:08].

Nikki Haley (58:07):

You scrubbed your website last week.

Hugh Hewitt (58:08):

Thank you, Ambassador Haley. Mr. Ramaswamy, we’ve talked about this. You campaign on TikTok. How do you get TikTok ban if you use it?

Vivek Ramaswamy (58:17):

Well, I want to laugh at why Nikki Haley didn’t answer your question, which is about looking at families in the eye. In the last debate, she made fun of me for actually joining TikTok while her own daughter was actually using the app for a long time. So you might want to take care of your family first.

Nikki Haley (58:30):

Leave my daughter out of your voice before.

Vivek Ramaswamy (58:33):

[inaudible 00:58:32] adult daughter. The next generation of Americans are using it, and that’s actually the point. You have her supporters propping her up. That’s fine. Here’s the truth.

Nikki Haley (58:42):

You’re just scum.

Vivek Ramaswamy (58:42):

The easy answer is actually to say that we’re just going to ban one app. We got to go further. We have to ban any U.S. company actually transferring U.S. data to the Chinese. Here’s a story most people don’t know. Airbnb hands over U.S. user data to the CCP. Now that’s a U.S. owned company. So this is the problem when you have Republicans that temporarily go the way the winds blow and now it’s popular to talk tough on China. When she was UN ambassador called them, literally her words, not mine, “Our great friend.” You can’t be fair-weather fans of the right policy, get to the root cause. Even U.S. companies in Silicon Valley are regularly doing it. Cut the virtue signaling. The fact of the matter is Democrats are on TikTok today. The only person, one of the few people who is putting up content the way the actual algorithms work, speaking for pro-Israel views or others is me [inaudible 00:59:33]-

Hugh Hewitt (59:33):

Ambassador Haley.

Vivek Ramaswamy (59:33):

… more Republicans will join it. But stop U.S. companies from turning over data to Chinese companies. That’s the real answer [inaudible 00:59:40].

Hugh Hewitt (59:41):

The moderators like Kristen don’t get to respond to personal attacks, but you do.

Nikki Haley (59:43):

Thank you very much. When he talks about me praising China, he doesn’t know the fact that the reason China was praised was because I negotiated with China and Russia the largest set of sanctions against North Korea in a generation. That is literally the reason North Korea stopped testing ballistic missiles.

Nikki Haley (01:00:00):

…so I said China did good on their part. That was a negotiation you could never do.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:00:04):

You said they were our great friends, is what you said Nikki. Those are your words, not mine. And so just own up to it.

Nikki Haley (01:00:07):

You would never have been able to get that negotiation done.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:00:10):

You can change your mind, that’s allowed, but don’t Lie to the people about what you’ve said or what you’ve done in South Carolina.

Nikki Haley (01:00:16):

I have fought against China my entire career at the United Nations.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:00:16):

You have brought them to South Carolina, Ron is right about that.

Nikki Haley (01:00:16):

Every day I fought China.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:00:17):

Look at the actual hard facts, she brought them to this country.

Nikki Haley (01:00:18):

And I did it by making sure that no one could get any agency heads in UN, I did it by making sure that we called them out on human rights. I did it by making sure that we held them accountable on everything that they did. That’s the reason we got out of Human rights Council. That’s the reason we called them out and there’s not been a day I haven’t stopped hitting China.

Hugh Hewitt (01:00:38):

Thank you. Senator Scott, it is your turn.

Nikki Haley (01:00:39):

Nikki, [inaudible 01:00:40] policy experience, with millions made afterwards.

Hugh Hewitt (01:00:41):

Mr Ramaswamy. Everybody else is hanging onto the rules here, Mr. Ramaswamy. Senator Scott.

Sen. Tim Scott (01:00:45):

Thank you. We should… I appreciate y’all clapping for me already. This is wonderful answer. Love this. Without any questions. What we should do is ban TikTok, period. Now we saw under former President Trump, he tried to ban TikTok twice, but was struck down by our federal courts. If you cannot ban TikTok, you should eliminate the Chinese presence on the app, period. We also should provide, and my parents Bill of rights, we give parents the opportunity to give their kids permission under 14 to be on those apps. I think it’s incredibly important for us as Americans to take back control of the information, especially of our kids. Where does it go? We should know that. One of the ways that we get to know that is by having a parental consent. But if we can eliminate TikTok, that is a first step.

(01:01:39)
But it’s not just TikTok. China continues to spy on our kids, but they’re also buying our farmlands. We talked about this several times there. We have to make sure that we use the tools that are in our toolkit to stop China from buying farmland near our bases. The third thing we have to do is make sure that they stop stealing our intellectual property. They’re literally stealing our IP to compete against us. My administration, we stopped that day one and we start making sure that we create six figure income for jobs made in America through my strategy.

Hugh Hewitt (01:02:20):

Thank you Senator. Kristen?

Kristen (01:02:21):

Hugh, thank you so much. We’re now going to talk about Venezuela, where millions have fled political and economic turmoil. Many Venezuelan immigrants are settling right here in Florida. Former President Trump and President Biden have taken different approaches to Nicolas Maduro’s regime with little result. Former President Trump put economic pressure on Venezuela and backed one of Maduro’s rivals. President Biden temporarily eased sanctions to encourage electoral reforms. Governor DeSantis, do you see the political situation in Venezuela as a threat to the United States and what would your approach be?

Gov. Ron DeSantis (01:02:55):

We should never rely on Venezuela for oil like Biden has had to go beg. I’m going to unleash all of America’s energy potential on day one. I’m taking all the Biden regulations, the Green New Deal, ripping it up and throwing it in the trash \can where it belongs. We’re going to lower your gas prices. We’re going to create jobs, we’re going to lower energy costs, but we’re also going to be more energy independent and secure. We’ll choose Midland over Moscow. We’ll choose the Marcellus over the Muellers and we’ll choose Bakken over Beijing, that is good for America’s national security. Biden’s Green New Deal, that’s good for Venezuela, it’s good for Russia, it’s good for Iran and it’s good for China. So I would turn the screws on the Venezuelan regime. I think it’s a corrupt, dictatorial regime and we should never go hat in hand begging for oil from them.

Kristen (01:03:47):

Just to be clear, would you reimpose the sanctions?

Gov. Ron DeSantis (01:03:49):

Yes, absolutely.

Kristen (01:03:51):

Ambassador Haley, what would your approach be?

Nikki Haley (01:03:53):

I stood on the Simon Bolivar Bridge and watched thousands of Venezuelans cross for hours in the hot sun, holding their babies to get the one meal they might get that day, going from Venezuelan to Columbia. They were fleeing socialism and begging for freedom. We need to make sure that we do everything we can to sanction Maduro. We shouldn’t be getting dirty oil and Biden just gave 500,000 Venezuelans temporary priority status, which is just going to have more of them come.

(01:04:21)
But on the energy side, it cracks me up that Ron continues to do this. He has opposed fracking. He’s opposed drilling. Last time he said it wasn’t true and everybody found out that it was true. He opposed it before Florida voters even voted on it.

Gov. Ron DeSantis (01:04:34):

That’s not true.

Nikki Haley (01:04:35):

He was praised by the Sierra Club and you’re trying to make up for it and act like you weren’t a liberal when it comes to the environment. You were, you always have been, just own it if that’s the case, but don’t keep saying you’re something that you’re not.

Gov. Ron DeSantis (01:04:47):

Let me respond to that.

Kristen (01:04:48):

Quick response Governor.

Gov. Ron DeSantis (01:04:49):

So our whole energy plan, you can’t get the shale without fracking. We are absolutely going to frack, but I disagree with Nikki Haley. I don’t think it’s a good idea to drill in the Florida Everglades and I know most Floridians agree with me.

Nikki Haley (01:05:03):

You banned fracking.

Kristen (01:05:04):

Thank you very much. Lester?

Lester Holt (01:05:07):

[inaudible 01:05:08] thank you. Let’s turn to one of the biggest issues for voters, that of course is the economy. This is a question that will go to all of you. An Iowa voter recently told NBC news, “How am I going to make sure my pantry is stocked without breaking the bank?” You’ve all said the best way to deal with rising prices is to cut government spending, but that would take time to play out and Americans are struggling right now.

(01:05:29)
Senator Scott, I’ll start with you. What would you do the moment you take office to help Americans manage the cost of living? So we’re talking about short-term here.

Sen. Tim Scott (01:05:38):

My mother was a single mother who raised me and my brother in a very challenging economic situation. The first thing I can tell you is that when your gas prices are 40% higher right now than they were just a little over two years ago, that’s not a problem for my mama, that was a crisis. The first thing I would do as President of the United States as I would sign the XL Keystone Pipeline and start seeing resources flow.

(01:06:02)
Second thing I would do is make sure that there’s certainty and predictability so that those folks who have the leases in our country would have the certainty and predictability to go ahead and become energy independent. We should focus not just on being energy independent, we should focus on being energy dominant. America is the home to more energy resources than any other country on the planet. We can reduce the price of energy, we can reduce the price of food and the price of electricity if we focus on my build here, don’t borrow from China plan. That is embedded in The Made in America strategy, creates 10 million new jobs in three different areas. One is innovation, second is the high-tech manufacturing and the third is the energy economy. We have an opportunity as Americans to actually export the surplus energy that we create in our nation and disconnect from China and from murderous dictators and tyrants around the world.

Lester Holt (01:07:11):

Your time is up, but let me just follow up.

Sen. Tim Scott (01:07:12):

Sure.

Lester Holt (01:07:12):

The idea of pumping gas, of turning on pipelines, that doesn’t make gas cheaper that day. I’m talking about you become president, what can you do specifically to help people feel better about their situation or be better with their situation?

Sen. Tim Scott (01:07:25):

Well actually it does, to be honest with you. The way that the economy works is it works on the ability to anticipate excess supply versus the demand. When that happens, confidence drives our prices down because we know there’s going to be a greater surplus. When you allow for those who have leases to actually start drilling to start using those leases for more energy excavation, you put our economy in the strongest position, and as a result of that, prices start going down. That is the kind of economy that as President of the United States, I would lead this nation to making sure that we first use the resources in our own country, and not going outside of our country in order to achieve our objective. Proverbs 22:7 reminds us that the borrower is slave to the lender. We have become an indentured servant too often to countries like China. By having an energy economy, we start allowing this nation to once again, return as the City on the hill.

Lester Holt (01:08:27):

Senator. Senator, thank you. Let me ask the same question to Governor DeSantis. You ticked off a number of things a moment ago, but some specific examples of ways that would put people on a better economic footing right away.

Gov. Ron DeSantis (01:08:41):

So I started off working minimum wage jobs. I did $6 an hour an electrician’s assistant. I worked all kinds of things to be able to get through school and I did that because I believed in America, if you work hard and get the most out of your God-given ability, you can get ahead. And what’s happening now, many of you are working hard and you’re falling further and further behind. I’ve met people in Iowa, New Hampshire and all across the country who’ve talked about all the burdens that they’re facing with the rising prices and I’ve heard from multiple people the same story. When they go grocery shopping, what they now do is they figure out what they have to take out of the cart once it’s ringing up, because it rings up so much faster and so much higher at the cash register that they can’t afford the full cart of groceries anymore.

(01:09:26)
We have to restore the American Dream in this country. What can you do on day one? Here’s what I’m going to do. I’m going to take all the executive orders, the regulations, everything involving Bidenomics, I’m going to rip it up and I’m going to throw it in the trashcan on day one where it belongs. That is going to give the economy breathing room and I’m also going to reign in the Federal Reserve. They have helped create, with their reckless monetary policy, what we have faced since the COVID-19 pandemic. They botched it, Congress botched it, both parties are to blame. Fed should focus on stable prices, they are not an economic central planner for the American people.

Lester Holt (01:10:05):

Governor, thank you. Mr. Ramaswamy, weigh in on this.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:10:07):

Sure.

Lester Holt (01:10:07):

Ways that you can improve people’s financial condition in the short term?

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:10:11):

Right, and as a CEO, the economic question is core to my vision and policy prescription for this country. Increase the supply of everything. It’s the law of supplies and demand. Increase the supply of energy, that brings down the cost of energy, grows the economy. Drill, frack, burn coal, embrace nuclear. Increase the supply of labor in this country. Stop using our taxpayer money to pay people more to stay at home instead of to go to work. Increase the supply of housing. People don’t talk about this one in the Republican party. The land use restrictions are constricting the supply of housing. That’s making housing more expensive for ordinary Americans across this country. So that’s the true answer and I think it takes a CEO in the White House who actually understands this to get this done, because Americans at home, they know that Bidenomics is a lie. Prices are going up, interest rates and mortgages to buy your home are going up, but wages have remained flat. That’s the hard diagnosis for our economy.

(01:11:05)
And this is about more than just our economy, I say this as a member of my generation. I’m 38 years old. I’m the youngest person ever to run for US president as a Republican. The reason my generation has lost our sense of national pride in part is because people in my generation feel like the American Dream isn’t available to them. And part of the reason why is we’ve burdened them, with four year college degrees that did not serve their headstart on the American Dream. People will be more proud of a country if we’re all making more money in that country. This is how we revive national pride and our identity and it will take a CEO in the White House, with zero based budgeting by the way to take on the federal debt, to get this job done.

Sen. Tim Scott (01:11:43):

Mr Ramaswamy, thank you. Let me turn To Governor Christie on that.

Gov. Chris Christie (01:11:46):

Well look, Lester part of the entire premise of the question, and I agree with Tim on this, is absolutely energy is the key to this because it drives every one of those other prices. Now food gets to your grocery store, it gets trucked and those truckers have to pay for fuel for the higher fuel prices. And when you go ahead and you tell people we are going to unleash every bit of American energy, every bit of its potential, what happens in the futurist markets, the prices go down, because those people who are believing that the Biden program will continue are the ones who are bidding this up. And let me tell you the other place that’s bidding it up, in the Middle East. And so if you don’t believe that making sure that Israel, and that Israel situation that’s going on right now isn’t resolved and resolved quickly as President of the United States, and bring stability back, that will also not permit countries like Saudi Arabia and others to be able to jack their prices as well.

(01:12:45)
And what they say is in response to a crisis, when it’s really what it’s in response to is putting more money in their pockets. When they have an American president who knows that Israel must be defended, not with humanitarian pauses and not with suggestions for ceasefire, but with letting them know we will supply them with everything they need, that will also bring stability to the market. Energy is the key to bringing this down. It’s what every American family needs when they turn on their lights, fill up their car and go to the grocery store, and we need to do that first and foremost. That’s the short-term answer.

Lester Holt (01:13:17):

Governor Christie, thank you. Ambassador Haley, let me come at this from a slightly different direction. Americans in rural communities are being especially squeezed by inflation right now. An Iowa State University study found that last year inflation cost rural households about an extra $5,000. How would you specifically help rural Americans who are suffering right now Ambassador?

Nikki Haley (01:13:38):

Well, I’m a product of rural America, I grew up in rural South Carolina, and I can tell you what we’re seeing now in America is the rich are getting richer and the poor are getting poorer. We have to go and start beefing up the middle class and the first thing I would do is I’ll eliminate the federal gas and diesel tax in this country. We’ll cut taxes on the middle class, but we have to stop the spending binge that’s happening by Republicans and Democrats in Congress. I will make sure, one, we claw back the $500 billion of unspent COVID dollars that are out there. Instead of 87,000 IRS agents going after middle America, we’ll go after the hundreds of billions of dollars of COVID fraud that exist, $1 out of every $7. We’ll stop the spending, we’ll stop the borrowing, we’ll eliminate the earmarks and I’ll veto any spending bill that doesn’t go back to pre-COVID levels. That will cut trillions and allow us to be safe.

(01:14:29)
We also need to be, not energy independent, energy dominant. We are blessed with resources, let’s do it. But the reason no one should give you a number Hugh on the amount of ships in the Navy, is because in a few years our interest expense is going to be more than our defense budget. So no one can give you that number realistically without first tackling what’s happening with the financial situation. It would be a false number to give you that. We have got to understand this is a crisis, it is a national security concern. If we don’t deal with what’s going to happen with that interest expense in a few years, we’re going to look like Japan, and we can’t let that happen. The strong dollar matters.

Lester Holt (01:15:11):

Ambassador, thank you very much. Kristen?

Kristen (01:15:12):

Americans could see their Social Security benefits drastically cut in the next decade because the program is running out of money. Former President Trump has said quote, “Under no circumstances should Republicans cut entitlements.” Governor Christie, first to you, you have proposed raising the retirement age for younger Americans. What would that age be specifically and would you consider making any other reforms to Social Security?

Gov. Chris Christie (01:15:39):

Sure, and we have to deal with this problem. Now look, if we raise the retirement age a few years for folks that are in their thirties and forties, I have a son who’s in the audience tonight who’s 30 years old. If he can’t adjust to a few year increase in Social Security retirement age over the next 40 years, I got bigger problems with him than his Social Security payments. And the fact is we need to be realistic about this. There are only three things that go into determining whether Social Security can be solvent or not. Retirement age, eligibility for the program in general and taxes. That’s it. We are already overtaxed in this country and we should not raise those taxes. But on eligibility also, I don’t know if out there tonight and if you’re watching Warren, I don’t know if Warren Buffett is collecting Social Security, but if he is, shame on you. You shouldn’t be taking the money.

(01:16:27)
There are a lot of programs in this country that we all pay for that we don’t get a direct benefit from. Food stamps is one of them. I’ve never, fortunately in my life, ever had me or my family on food stamps. But I’m glad it’s there so that no one in this country goes to bed hungry at night if they have availability to that program. But I don’t get a direct benefit. The fact is on Social Security, remember why it was established. It was established as a safety net program to make sure that no one would grow old in this country in poverty. That’s what we got to get back to. Rich people should not be collecting Social Security.

Kristen (01:17:01):

Governor, can you give me a specific age? 69 70, what would the age be?

Gov. Chris Christie (01:17:05):

No, look, that’s going to be a part of a negotiation with Congress, Kirsten, and hell, I’m not going to start negotiating until I get there.

Kristen (01:17:10):

All right. Ambassador Haley, let me have you weigh in on this because you said in June that you would be open to raising the retirement age. Have you determined what that age would be specifically and what other reforms are you looking at?

Nikki Haley (01:17:23):

So first of all, any candidate that tells you that they’re not going to take on entitlements, is not being serious. Social Security will go bankrupt in 10 years, medicare will go bankrupt in eight. Right now you have Ron and Trump joining Biden and Pelosi saying they’re not going to change or do any sort of entitlement reform. What we need to do is keep our promises. Those that have been promised should keep it. But for like my kids in their twenties, you go and you say we’re going to change the rules, you change the retirement age for them. Instead of cost of living increases, we should go to increases based on inflation. We should limit benefits on the wealthy. Bernie markets can tell you he hates getting that check, limit the benefits on the wealthy. And then expand Medicare advantage plans. Seniors love that and let’s make sure we do that so that they can have more competition. That’s how we’ll deal with entitlement reform and that’s how we’ll start to pay down this debt.

Kristen (01:18:13):

And can you give me a specific age? Have you determined the age?

Nikki Haley (01:18:16):

Again, you have to work with… Kris, what I can tell you is it’s going to be those in their twenties just coming into the system and it should reflect more of life expectancy. It doesn’t do that now.

Kristen (01:18:25):

All right, Mr. Ramaswamy, have you determined if you would touch entitlements and Social Security? What, if any, reforms are you looking at?

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:18:33):

So this is really important right now. We’re working within the last window I believe we will have, to actually fix this problem while still leaving Social Security and Medicare benefits for current seniors intact. I’ll tell you how. The other candidates assume, like Nikki, that it can’t be done, and on her math she’s right about it. But her math assumes $7 trillion of our $33 trillion national debt, going to fight wars like in places like Iraq and Afghanistan. Minus that, our national debt would be $26 trillion right now.

(01:19:03)
Then you go to zero based budgeting which I’ve proposed. As a CEO, it’s how I’ve run businesses, it’s how many CEOs run businesses. Don’t use last year’s budget as the baseline. Start with zero as the baseline and then ask what’s actually necessary. 75% headcount reduction? Yes, that is severe. In the number of federal employees in the Washington DC bureaucracy. Shut down redundant agencies that should not exist. Deliver economic growth as a positive tailwind. I think we can get to three, four, maybe even 5% GDP growth if we really take the regulatory shackles off of our economy.

(01:19:39)
And against that backdrop, I believe this is our last best window to be able to take care of our national debt problem through those severe measures, including sacrificing the foreign wars that many blood-thirsty members of both parties have a hunger for. That’s the one secret for how we’re going to be able to do this, and that requires discipline. So we can’t have the first conversation we were having, sending foreign aid willy-nilly to countries whose national debt per capita is less than ours.

Kristen (01:20:05):

Thank you, Mr. Ramaswamy.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:20:05):

But if we do this correctly, I think this is our last window and it’ll take a CEO from the next generation to do it.

Kristen (01:20:10):

Thank you. Thank you very much. Senator Scott, weigh in here. What are you looking at to keep Social Security sustainable?

Sen. Tim Scott (01:20:15):

The bottom line is a simple one. We have to grow our economy and cut our spending. Let me just say to my mama and to every other mama or grandfather receiving Social Security, as President of the United States I will protect your Social Security. The fact is that we’re spending today about $1.1 trillion on Social Security, about $750 billion on Medicare, about $300 billion on Medicaid, about $400 billion on veterans benefits, $1.7 trillion on annual appropriations. If we’re going to actually tame this tiger, the way you do it is not by picking on seniors who have paid into a program that deserve their money coming back out to them. The way you deal with it is, number one, you have to grow your economy. My plan, Made in America, creates 10 million new jobs, grows our economy at 5%. By doing so, you add trillions of dollars of economic activity and billions of dollars to your treasury.

(01:21:10)
Number two, you have to cut taxes. When we cut taxes in 2017, I wrote the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Everybody said, “Well guess what? Revenue will go down.” Well in 2018, after we wrote it in 2017, what happened? Revenue went up by 3% and the next year it went up by another 3%. So what we know is that the Laffer Curve still works, for the lower the tax, the higher the revenue. And finally, if we’re going to deal with it, we have to take our annual appropriations back to pre-2020, pre-COVID levels of spending, which would save us about a half a trillion dollars in the next budget window. By doing that, we deal with Social Security and our mandatory spending.

Kristen (01:21:50):

Senator, thank you. Thank you, Senator. Very quickly, would you raise the retirement age? Would you be open to raising the retirement age or do you rule that out?

Sen. Tim Scott (01:21:55):

All you have to do is go to a farm in Iowa and watch the hard work and the dedication.

Kristen (01:22:04):

Yes or no though, Senator?

Sen. Tim Scott (01:22:04):

You and I are having conversation.

Kristen (01:22:06):

Yes or no, though?

Sen. Tim Scott (01:22:06):

My answer is no. But going… listen to this though, before you go on. Thank you. The fact of the matter is that the more physical your labor, a year or two or three more is actually challenging to the physical body. You and I might have a different perspective, but for those farmers, they’re working night and day.

Kristen (01:22:26):

Thank you. Thank you Senator, I appreciate it. Governor DeSantis finally to you, would you be open to raising the retirement agent and how would you keep Social Security sustainable?

Gov. Ron DeSantis (01:22:34):

Well look as governor of Florida, I know a few people on Social Security and I know it’s important. My grandmother lived till 91 and Social Security was their sole source of income, and that’s true for a lot of seniors throughout this country. So what I’d say to seniors at America, promise made, promise kept. I understand what you’re going through with the rising prices and you need that Social Security check. So we’ll make sure to get that done. What can you do to help shore up Social Security? One of the things that’s causing problems is the inflation. We have to reduce inflation. When you have higher inflation, the seniors get a cost of living adjustment, which means the program’s spending more, but it doesn’t cover the increase in the actual inflation rate. We also do need to get to at least 3% growth, you’re never going to be able to have issues be able to solve the budget without that. But I would note this, Congress for decades took money from Social Security. Social Security would have more tax revenue that it put out. They would take it and then they’d write an IOU to Social Security. Congress has a lot of dirty hands on this. I’m going to force Congress to stop spending so much money.

(01:23:43)
And one thing we have to talk about, the retirement age is just something that’s changed in the last four or five years. Life expectancy in the United States is declining in this country.

Kristen (01:23:51):

So Governor, yes or no? Would you raise it? Would you raise the retirement age?

Gov. Ron DeSantis (01:23:54):

When life expectancy is declining? I don’t see how you could raise it the other direction. So it’s one thing to peg it on life expectancy, but we have had a significant decline in life expectancy in this country and that’s just a fact.

Kristen (01:24:05):

So you rule it out. All right. Governor DeSantis, thank you. Thank you candidates, and we will be right back after a quick break from Miami, Florida.

Advertisement 1 (01:24:23):

Who do you think will win the debate? Text your answer to 80810.

(01:24:26)
We all like free stuff, especially free trips. Text tickets to 80810 to enter to win two free tickets to a future debate. Plus we’ll throw in free airfare and hotel.

Advertisement 2 (01:24:51):

Did you know the government can essentially rob you in plain sight? Former Fed Chair Alan Greenspan warned, deficit spending is simply a scheme for the confiscation of wealth. But he added gold stands in the way of this insidious process. Birch Gold Group has helped thousands of Americans diversify their IRA or 401k into gold. To get a free info kit from Birch Gold, text now to 989898. Again, text now to 989898, right now.

Kevin Sorbo (01:25:21):

Do you owe over $10,000 in back taxes? Kevin Sorbo here with an important message. The Biden administration has proposed an $80 billion plan to boost IRS collections. This means they could garnish your wages, levy your bank account, and even seize your property. Tax Network USA, a trusted tax firm, can help protect your income and assets today while quickly settling your tax debt. But you have to act now while you still have options. Call Tax Network USA today.

Advertisement 4 (01:25:53):

At Consumer Cellular, we offer amazing 5G coverage backed up by incredible customer service. But that wouldn’t mean much without super low prices. You already know we’re up half as much as the largest carriers, but guess what? AARP Members Can save even more.

(01:26:08)
Yahoo. Uh-oh.

(01:26:13)
Switch to consumer cellular now and get unlimited talk and text with a flexible data plan starting at only $20 a month.

Advertisement 5 (01:26:21):

This is Rumble, the platform founded on the principle of unfiltered access to diverse ideas. Rumble offers a chance to discover America’s authentic voices, participate in bold discussions and help protect a free and open internet. Rumble, bold and free. Visit rumble.com and download the app today.

Advertisement 6 (01:27:16):

Help and hope go hand in hand. GiftsSentGo, the leader in online fundraising.

Kevin Sorbo (01:27:20):

Do you owe over $10,000 in back taxes? Kevin Sorbo here with an important message. The Biden administration has proposed an $80 billion plan to boost IRS collections. This means they could garnish your wages, levy your bank account, and even seize your property. Tax Network USA, a trusted tax firm, can help protect your income and assets today while quickly settling your tax debt. But you have to act now while you still have options. Call Tax Network USA today.

Lester Holt (01:27:58):

Welcome back to tonight’s NBC News Republican Presidential Debate. Once again, here’s Salem Radio’s Hugh Hewitt.

Hugh Hewitt (01:28:15):

Thank you Lester. When NBC News talks to voters, when I talk to voters every day, they all say that the border is a top issue. It can mean a lot of different things. It can mean 2 million people who crossed illegally last year. It can mean more than 150 arrests of people on the terror watch list. It can mean the burden on states from having migrants move into their states from the southwestern border. But I want to talk about opioids specifically and fentanyl. And I’ll start with you, Senator Scott. Tens of thousands of Americans families have suffered a death to fentanyl. Young people sometimes die taking one pill. What can you do as Commander in Chief on the first day to stop fentanyl and the waterfall of it into this country?

Sen. Tim Scott (01:28:56):

Well, number one, we should close our southern border. For $10 billion we could close our southern border. For an additional $5 billion, we could use the currently available military technology to surveil our southern border to stop fentanyl from crossing our border. I’ve already led on legislation that would sanction the Mexican cartels. If you remember the path, the precursors come from China, then they are manufactured in Mexican labs, and then the Mexican cartels bring them across our border. By sanctioning their accounts and eliminating their cash, we starve them of what they need.

(01:29:33)
Number one, closing our southern border makes it nearly impossible to get in. The military grade technology is a backup, making sure that we not only stop 70,000 deaths in the last 12 months because of fentanyl. It also allows us to deal with the human trafficking travesty that is entering in our country in the same path. If we are going to deal effectively

Sen. Tim Scott (01:30:00):

With a hundred thousand overdose deaths in our country and the 70,000 that is directly linked to fentanyl, we have to deal with our ports of entry and deal with our southern border. If we do that effectively, we have started to reducing the challenge from the outside and then we have to deal with the challenge on the inside, which seems to be connected to a mental health crisis that is spreading throughout our nation.

Hugh Hewitt (01:30:28):

Thank you, Senator. Governor Christie, Senator Scott just mentioned ports of entry, 90% of the fentanyl that is seized in the United States is seized at ports of entry. We don’t know what’s coming in across the open southern border. You’ve been a United States’ Attorney, you’ve taken on cartels. Can it really be done quickly? What would you do as president?

Gov. Chris Christie (01:30:44):

It can be done quickly in two ways, Hugh, on fentanyl. The first way is exactly as you suggest that ports of entry, we have to beef up what our law enforcement has in terms of technology. I would invest in that as president. We need to make sure that law enforcement has every tool at its disposal to do it. Secondly, on day one, I would sign an executive order that would send the National Guard to partner with Customs and Border Patrol, both at ports of entry and at the open ports of our border. Customs and Border Patrol agents are overwhelmed. There’s 200,000 encounters a month over the last 11 months. We simply do not have the man and woman power at the border to be able to deal with it. And so dealing with both law enforcement and you’re right, we have done this, we can do this, but we got to give them the tools to do it and technology is one of the biggest tools that we don’t have enough of at the ports of entry.

(01:31:38)
Now, we also need to lower demand, Hugh, in this country. And the way to lower demand is to start treating people again. We started to do this before COVID and we haven’t done enough of it. And for every family out there tonight who has lost a loved one to fentanyl or to any other type of opioid overdose, what you know is all you want is a chance for them to win their lives back. When I’m president of the United States, we’re going to call this what it is. It is a disease like heart disease, diabetes, or any other disease like cancer that can be treated, should be treated. We not only have to stop supply, but we have to lower demand and save lives.

Hugh Hewitt (01:32:16):

Thank you, Governor. Governor DeSantis, you have talked about using United States special forces to attack the cartels where they manufacture the chemicals that come from China. How often, how many, what does that look like?

Gov. Ron DeSantis (01:32:32):

Well, first I was speaking to a dad who lost a son to fentanyl overdose. Son wasn’t a drug addict, he had taken some pill that happened to be laced with fentanyl and it was a fatal overdose. And when he told me, obviously the pain of losing a child is as bad as it gets, but he said what was salt in the wounds is that these elites in DC don’t give a damn about what’s going on in this country. They don’t care that we have tens of thousands of opioid deaths, that the fentanyl’s pouring in. They are not taking the type of action we need to. We’re declaring it a national emergency on day one. I’m sending US military to the border. I’m going to stop the invasion cold. I am going to deport people who came illegally and I’m even going to build the border wall and have Mexico pay for it like Donald Trump promised.

(01:33:16)
How are you going to do it? Yeah, Mexico’s not going to fork over money. We’re going to impose fees on the remittances that foreign workers send to foreign countries. We’ll raise billions of dollars, I’ll build a wall. But we are going to designate the cartels to be foreign terrorist organizations or something similar to that and we’re going to authorize the use of deadly force. We’re going to have maritime operations to interdict precursor chemicals going into Mexico. But I’ll tell you this, if someone in the drug cartels is sneaking fentanyl across the border when I’m president, that’s going to be the last thing they do. We’re going to shoot them stone cold dead

Hugh Hewitt (01:33:53):

Ambassador Haley, if the United States uses special forces in Mexico without prior notice to the Mexican allies to our south, what would your colleagues at the United Nations think about that?

Nikki Haley (01:34:04):

I don’t care what my colleagues at the United Nations think. What I’ll tell you is first of all, you have to go to the source. We have lost more Americans in the Vietnam, Afghanistan, and Iraq wars combined. We lost 75,000 Americans last year. Go to the source. It is the reason why we’ll continue to say we will end all normal trade relations with China until they stop murdering Americans. You watch how quick that flow stops.

(01:34:34)
The second thing is we’ll send special operations in to take out the cartels. We need to go to where they’re distributing it, where the supply centers are and take them out. We’ll put 25,000 more Border Patrol and ICE agents on the ground and let them do their job. We will defund sanctuary cities. We will go back to the Remain in Mexico policy so that everybody stays in Mexico and they never get here in the first place.

(01:34:57)
And instead of catch and deport, we’ll go to catch and release. I’m sorry, instead of catch and release, we’ll go to catch and deport. That is the way we’ll deal with the border. Those are the things that we have to do going forward. But I do agree with Chris. One of the first things that we have to do is really focus on mental health and addiction centers. It is something that is needed in our country terribly because we don’t deal with mental health and someone who doesn’t get care for mental health falls into addiction and we owe it to them to treat it like the cancer that it is.

Hugh Hewitt (01:35:26):

Mr. Ramaswamy, special forces in Mexico, shoot them stone-cold dead at the border.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:35:33):

One thing I just want to say in how we’re talking about this issue is, like Ron, I’ve actually met many parents across this country who have lost their kids to laced pharmaceuticals that have fentanyl in them.

Gov. Ron DeSantis (01:35:43):

That’s right.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:35:43):

The only thing I would ask, Ron, I think you’d be on the same page with me on this. Let’s not even call that an overdose.

Gov. Ron DeSantis (01:35:48):

Right.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:35:49):

That is not an overdose, that is poisoning. If you put that fentanyl in a Big Mac, we would not call that an overdose. You’d call it what it is. It’s closer to bio-terrorism. And I say that because as it uniquely relates to this crisis, that does warrant more aggressive means to deal with it. So there’s a new presidential election in Mexico in 2024. People may not be aware of that. It’s going to be someone other than Obrador, who has been a disaster in Mexico. I think he’s even mentioned me obliquely in speeches to say that somebody who would do this shouldn’t get anywhere near the White House. Well, AMLO, get out of the way. There’s going to be someone else in charge. I hope to build a good relationship with that next president of Mexico. We’ll use our own military to seal our own southern border. What we need to do is stop using our military to protect somebody else’s border halfway around the world when we’re short right here at home, get serious about protecting this border.

(01:36:40)
And then the other thing that hasn’t been discussed is the northern border. I’m the only candidate on the stage as far as I’m aware, who has actually visited the northern border. There was enough fentanyl that was captured just on the northern border last year to kill 3 million Americans. So we got to just skate to where the puck is going, not just where the puck is. Don’t just build the wall, build both walls. Can’t just complete the wall. Use the military to seal the Swiss cheese for the tunnels that they’re actually building underneath that wall-

Hugh Hewitt (01:37:07):

Thank you, Mr. Ramaswamy.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:37:08):

… Be practical and actually get this job done.

Hugh Hewitt (01:37:09):

Thank you. Kristen.

Kristen (01:37:11):

Thank you, Hugh. Let’s talk now about last night’s election results. Abortion rights supporters saw victories in Ohio and Virginia following earlier wins in states like Kansas and Kentucky. Governor DeSantis, first to you. How do you see the path forward for Republicans on this issue?

Gov. Ron DeSantis (01:37:31):

Well, I stand for a culture of life and I understand that it’s important that everyone gets a shot. I’m reminded of a story about a young mother who was struggling in Jamaica about 40 years ago, 45 years ago. She was counseled to not have a baby because she was poor. Baby wouldn’t have opportunity. And she came close to have an abortion, but she decided to have the baby, born poor in Jamaica. And the reason I know that story is because that baby girl ended up immigrating to the state of Florida, becoming a lawyer and a judge and I appointed her to the Florida Supreme Court in August of 2022.

(01:38:06)
We’re better off when everybody counts. We’re better off when we can promote a culture of life. At the same time, I understand that some of these states are doing it a little bit different. Texas is not going to do it the same as New Hampshire. Iowa’s not necessarily going to do it the same as Virginia. So you got to work from the bottom up. You got to do a better job on these referenda. I think of all the stuff that’s happened to the pro-life cause, they have been caught flatfooted on these referenda and they have been losing the referenda.

(01:38:34)
A lot of the people who are voting for the referenda are Republicans who would vote for a Republican candidate. So you got to understand how to do that. But let’s just be clear, the Democrats have taken a position, they will not identify the point at which there should be any protection all the way up until birth. That is wrong and we cannot stand for that.

Kristen (01:38:53):

All right, Governor DeSantis thank you. Ambassador Haley, let me have you weigh in. Former President Trump has consistently blamed the abortion issue and how Republican candidates have talked about it for their electoral losses. How do you see the path forward?

Nikki Haley (01:39:05):

I’ve said it before. I think you have to be honest with the American people. This is a personal issue for every woman and every man. I am unapologetically pro-life, not because the Republican Party tells me to be, but because my husband Michael was adopted and I had trouble having both of my children. So I’m surrounded by blessings. Having said that, when you look post-Roe, a wrong was made right. They took it out of the hands of unelected justices and they put it in the hands of the people and now we’re seeing states vote. And what I’ll tell you is as much as I’m pro-life, I don’t judge anyone for being pro-choice and I don’t want them to judge me for being pro-life. So when we’re looking at this, there are some states that are going more on the pro-life side. I welcome that there’s some states that are going more on the pro-choice side. I wish that wasn’t the case, but the people decided.

(01:39:51)
But when it comes to the federal law, which is what’s being debated here, be honest, it’s going to take 60 Senate votes, a majority of the House and a president to sign it. So we haven’t had 60 Senate votes in over a hundred years. We might have 45 pro-life senators. So no Republican president can ban abortions any more than a Democrat president can ban these state laws. So let’s find consensus. Let’s agree on how we can ban late term abortions. Let’s make sure we encourage adoptions and good quality adoptions. Let’s make sure we make contraception accessible. Let’s make sure that none of these state laws put a woman in jail or give her the death penalty for getting an abortion. Let’s focus on how to save as many babies as we can and support as many moms as we can and stop the judgment. We don’t need to divide America over this issue anymore.

Kristen (01:40:40):

Thank you Ambassador. Senator Scott, I’d like you to weigh in. How do you see the path forward and what do you make of what Ambassador Haley just said? Do you see this as a consensus issue?

Sen. Tim Scott (01:40:57):

Well, I’m a hundred percent pro-life. I have had a hundred percent pro-life voting record. I would certainly, as President of the United States, have a 15-week national limit. I would not allow states like California, Illinois or New York to have abortion up until the day of birth. I certainly wouldn’t allow, not allow for governors, former governor, democratic governor of Virginia who talked about infanticide. We need a 15-week federal limit. Three out of four Americans agree with a 15-week limit, 47 out of 50 countries in Europe agree with a 15-week limit.

(01:41:37)
I would challenge both Nikki and Ron to join me at a 15-week limit. It is in our nation’s best interest and frankly, I think it’s unethical and immoral to allow for abortions up until the day of birth. We have an opportunity in this nation to stop that reckless behavior from states like California, New York and Illinois. I’d go a step further. In my parents’ plan, we start by talking about funding block granting resources to crisis pregnancy centers. We should support adoption. There are a number of ways that we can say to the expectant mother that we stand with you. We should not only be pro-life before the child is born, we should be pro-life after the child is born just as much.

Kristen (01:42:25):

Senator Scott, thank you. Ambassador Haley, your name was invoked. Would you support a 15-week federal limit?

Nikki Haley (01:42:31):

I would support anything that would pass because that’s what would save more babies and support more moms. But do you have to be honest with the American people and I appreciate that Tim keeps calling me out for this, but Tim, there was a bill last year. Lindsey Graham sponsored it. You didn’t even co-sponsor the bill and then when you first were interviewed on this, when you ran, you wouldn’t even say you were for 15 weeks.

(01:42:52)
What I’m saying to the American people is-

Sen. Tim Scott (01:42:54):

That’s just not true.

Nikki Haley (01:42:55):

… Let’s see what we can agree on. Let’s bring people together and decide what we can agree on. I will sign anything where we can get 60 Senate votes, but don’t make the American people think that you’re going to push something on them when we don’t even have the votes in the Senate. It’s important that we’re honest about that.

Kristen (01:43:11):

Let me go to Mr. Ramaswamy. Would you support a 15-week federal ban and what is the path forward on this issue?

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:43:16):

I just wanted to say, I mean I think Nikki Haley did invoke being honest and I at least want to give credit to Tim Scott. He’s honest about where he stood and I think you should be honest, not making a political calculus but to say if a bill is served up, would you sign it? Here’s my view on this. Speaking as a man, they say men have trouble speaking on this issue. I don’t think we need to be that way. It was my home state of Ohio, I’m upset about this, yesterday that passed a constitutional amendment that now effectively codifies a right to abortion all the way up to the time of birth without parental consent. Why? It’s back to that Republican culture of losing.

(01:43:49)
The Republicans did not have an alternative amendment or vision on the table. I know Ohio. I was born, raised, and I live there. It’s representative of the country. If, in the state of Ohio, we talked about access to contraception, adoption and also here’s the missing ingredient in this movement, sexual responsibility for men. We live in an era of reliable genetic paternity tests that are a hundred percent reliable. So we can say men deserve more responsibility. So we can tell women, “We’re all in this together.” It’s not men’s rights versus women’s rights, it’s about human rights. And I come back to that case that Clarence Thomas spoke of. A pregnant woman walking down the street, she’s assaulted, the unborn child dies in that assault. You find me one person in this country who says that that criminal does not deserve liability for that death. You won’t find one. That says we share the same instincts on this issue, but we require, I believe, a different generation-

Kristen (01:44:48):

Mr. Ramaswamy, thank you.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:44:49):

… of leadership to actually lead us forward and unite the country on this-

Kristen (01:44:51):

Thank you.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:44:52):

… Honesty.

Kristen (01:44:52):

Thank you, Mr. Ramaswamy. Governor Christie, as you know, federal limits are important to a lot of Republicans. Where do you stand on this issue and what is the path forward for Republicans?

Gov. Chris Christie (01:45:02):

For 50 years, conservative lawyers have been arguing that the federal government should have absolutely nothing to do with this issue constitutionally because it’s nowhere in the Constitution. And then Dobbs comes and we finally gain that victory, which was the creation of a constitutional right out of thin air that didn’t exist. And now we have people running to say, “Let’s short circuit the states from doing what they need to do and let’s go right to some type of federal ban at a certain number of weeks and people on this stage have been all over the place. 20 weeks, 15 weeks, 12, six. Look the [inaudible 01:45:40] thinks we’re really smart and this is an issue that should be decided in each state. And I trust the people of this country, state by state, to make the call for themselves.

(01:45:51)
Now that’s going to lead to a lot of divergence. In Oklahoma you can’t get an abortion unless the life of the mother is at risk. In my home state of New Jersey, it goes up to nine months that you get an abortion. I find that morally reprehensible, but that is what the people of our state have voted for and we should not short circuit that process until every state’s people have the right to weigh in on it. But here’s the bigger issue, Kirsten. The bigger issue is, and Tim began to touch on this, we’re not pro-life for the whole life. To be pro-life for the whole life means that the life of a 16-year-old drug addict on the floor of the county lockup is precious and we should get treatment for her to restore her life. The 52-year-old who’s drug addicted should make sure that any of his children who he’s passed that addiction on to are treated well, too.

Kristen (01:46:36):

Thank you.

Gov. Chris Christie (01:46:36):

Pro-life is not just in the womb, Kirsten, it’s for the whole life.

Kristen (01:46:39):

All right, Governor, thank you. Candidates, thank you. We’re going to take a final break and when we come back we’ll hear from all of you with your closing statements. This is the NBC news Republican presidential debate. We’ll be back, right after this.

Advertisement 6 (01:47:22):

Help and hope go hand in hand. GiveSendGo, the leader in online fundraising.

Advertisement 2 (01:47:26):

Did you know the government can essentially rob you in plain sight? Former Fed chair Alan Greenspan warned, “Deficit spending is simply a scheme for the confiscation of wealth.” But he added, “Gold stands in the way of this insidious process.” Birch Gold Group has helped thousands of Americans diversify their IRA or 401k into gold. To get a free info kit from Birch Gold, text now to 989898. Again, text now to 989898 right now.

Kevin Sorbo (01:47:57):

Do you owe over $10,000 in back taxes? Kevin Sorbo here with an important message. The Biden Administration has proposed an $80 billion plan to boost IRS collections. This means they could garnish your wages, levy your bank account, and even seize your property. Tax network USA, a trusted tax firm can help protect your income and assets today while quickly settling your tax debt. But you have to act now while you still have options. Call Tax Network USA today.

Advertisement 4 (01:48:29):

At Consumer Cellular we offer amazing 5G coverage backed up by incredible customer service. But that wouldn’t mean much without super low prices. You already know we’re up half as much as the largest carriers, but guess what? AARP members can save even more.

Speaker 4 (01:48:44):

Yahoo. Uh-oh.

Speaker 5 (01:48:48):

Switch to Consumer Cellular now and get unlimited talk and text with a flexible data plan starting at only $20 a month.

Advertisement 6 (01:49:52):

Help and hope go hand in hand. GiveSendGo, the leader in online fundraising.

Speaker 6 (01:49:56):

Ronna McDaniel, a compliment to you and the RNC that video clipping team you’ve got over at the RNC, they’re doing fantastic work.

Speaker 7 (01:50:02):

That is problematic for the White House.

Speaker 8 (01:50:04):

Republican National Committee.

Speaker 9 (01:50:05):

The Republican National Committee was founded on-

Speaker 10 (01:50:07):

Last week, we played this RNC ad.

Speaker 11 (01:50:09):

As the RNC points out, this is yet another humiliating failure. All of it caught on tape.

Speaker 12 (01:50:14):

They’ve been killing it. The whole team. They’re doing a great job.

Speaker 13 (01:50:19):

Who do you think will win the debate? Text your answer to 80810.

Lester Holt (01:50:49):

Well welcome back everyone. With only two hours for a debate, we know there are other major issues that are important to Republican primary voters. I’ll ask you each to please use your closing statement to focus on any topic you didn’t have time to address and why you and not former President Trump would be the party’s best choice to tackle these important issues. You each have a minute. Senator Scott, we’ll start with you. One minute.

Sen. Tim Scott (01:51:13):

There’s a crisis that is growing in our nation and that crisis is cultural and spiritual. We need a renewal, a great awakening. We should reject the Left’s valueless, faithless, fatherless society. We should turn back to faith, patriotism, and individual responsibility. We should stop choosing victimhood and start choosing victory. We should stop kneeling in protest and start kneeling in prayer. There are basic truths that Built this country. If you’re able-bodied in America, you work. If you take out a loan, you pay it back. If you commit a violent crime, you go to jail. And if God made you a man, you play sports against men. I do not just want to-

Lester Holt (01:52:06):

Audience please.

Sen. Tim Scott (01:52:07):

I do not just want to win the battle against Joe Biden. I want us together to win the war. The war for our Christian conservative-

Lester Holt (01:52:17):

Senator Scott.

Sen. Tim Scott (01:52:18):

… Values that changed my life.

Lester Holt (01:52:19):

Senator Scott, thank you. Governor Christie, you have one minute for your closing remarks.

Sen. Tim Scott (01:52:22):

… That’s why I’m asking for your vote.

Gov. Chris Christie (01:52:28):

Thank you for hosting tonight. Listen, it’s a gift. A gift to be an American. And I’m running for President of the United States because I’m tired. I’m tired of seeing the division. I’m tired of seeing the anger. And I could see in the eyes of Americans, their exhaustion. Their exhaustion from the petty personal politics that have taken over this country over the last number of years. I’m running for president to be a president of consequence, to do the big things, to make sure that America’s role in the world stays number one. That we stand up for our friends and allies around the world and we stand up for what we believe in right here at home.

(01:53:08)
And it’s not to eliminate our differences. Our differences has always been our strength as a country, not our weakness. But you can’t truly say you love America unless you’re ready to open up your heart to every American. I’m going to open up my heart to every American as president and I will make sure that I return honesty, integrity to the Oval Office. We deserve and should accept nothing less.

Lester Holt (01:53:32):

Governor, thank you very much. Let’s go to Mr. Ramaswamy now. Your one minute.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:53:39):

We’ve talked a lot about foreign wars tonight, but we’re in the middle of a war right here at home. It’s a war not between Black and white, or Democrat and Republican. It’s between those of us who believe in our founding ideals and love this country and a fringe minority who hates the United States of America. And I think it’s going to take a commander in chief to lead us to victory in that war, who first of all knows that we’re in a war. Second of all, can’t be captured by the special interests along the way. But third is from the next generation. Somebody with fresh legs to lead us to victory. I’ll shut down the deep state. I’ll declare economic independence from China. I’ll keep us out of World War III and then revive national pride in this country.

(01:54:18)
I also want to close with one message to the Democrat party. End this farce that Joe Biden is going to be your nominee. We know he’s not even the President of the United States. He’s a puppet for the managerial class. So have the guts to step up and be honest about who you’re actually going to put up so we can have an honest debate. Biden should step aside, end his candidacy now, so we can see whether it’s Newsom or Michelle Obama or whoever else.

Lester Holt (01:54:40):

All right, Mr. Ramaswamy.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:54:40):

Just tell us truth so we can have an honest debate.

Lester Holt (01:54:42):

Your time is up.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:54:49):

Ambassador Haley, you have one minute for your closing.

Nikki Haley (01:54:53):

Thank you. The world is on fire. We have a war in Europe. We’ve got a war in the Middle East. We’ve got China on the march. It is very important that we know how to defend our freedoms and how to defeat terrorism and socialism. We have to know the difference between good and evil. We have to know the difference between right and wrong. We need to know that a strong America doesn’t start wars as strong America prevents wars. And the way we can focus on that is to make sure we go back to the soul of America and be strong and proud again. And we can’t do that. We can’t win the fights of the 21st century with politicians from the 20th century. We have to move forward and we can do this. I know we can do this. So join our movement, go to nikkihaley.com and we will once again show what America that’s strong and proud looks like. God bless.

Lester Holt (01:55:49):

Ambassador, thank you. Governor DeSantis, you’re closing. You have one minute.

Gov. Ron DeSantis (01:55:57):

We must reverse our country’s decline and that is going to require leadership. I will take the hits, I will take the arrows, I will take the barbs because it’s not about me, it’s about you. It’s not about the past, it’s about your future. We are going to fight for you. I am going to win for you and your family, and I’m going to lead this country’s revival. As a veteran of the Iraq War and in the Navy, I will always put service above self as President.

(01:56:27)
As the father of three young kids, I’m going to ensure that this country is left to the next generation in better shape than we found it. And as the Governor of Florida, I delivered on all my promises and you can trust me to deliver for you. As the President of the United States, I am asking for your vote. I’ll be a nominee that will be able to win the election. I will be a leader you can be proud of. And as your President, I will not let you down. God bless you.

Lester Holt (01:56:53):

Governor DeSantis, thank you. That is going to conclude our debate. The next line says if the audience can hold their applause. That didn’t work out. But anyway, for just a few more seconds, I’ll ask you to just hold the applause. On behalf of my fellow moderators, I want to thank the candidates for their time and for this spirited debate. Really good, deep conversation and we appreciate you all being here. Thank you as well to our wonderful host here at the Adrienne Arsht Performing Arts Center. On behalf of the Republican National Committee and all of us at NBC News, goodnight everyone from Miami.

Speaker 14 (01:58:00):

And good evening. It was billed as a debate that was make or break for all the candidates and each of those candidates on stage right now came to make a mark. Good evening. I’m Tom Llamas here in Miami.

Hallie Jackson (01:58:09):

I’m Hallie Jackson alongside Tom here in the spin room. As you…

Speaker 15 (01:58:51):

( Singing).

Transcribe Your Own Content

Try Rev and save time transcribing, captioning, and subtitling.

PCMag Editors Choice
TrustPilot Reviews
Other Related Transcripts
Nicole Shanahan Speaks To Supporters After Being Announced As RFK Jr's Running Mate
RFK Jr. Unveils Running Mate in 2024 Presidential Bid
• 21 hours ago
Biden Speaking in Las Vegas
Biden Speaks at Campaign Event in Las Vegas
• 1 week ago
Tucker Carlson Responds to SOTU Address
Tucker Carlson Responds to State of the Union Address
• 2 weeks ago

Copyright Disclaimer

Under Title 17 U.S.C. Section 107, allowance is made for "fair use" for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and research. Fair use is permitted by copyright statute that might otherwise be infringing.

Trust pilot grey score card
PCMag Editors Choice
PC editor choice logo
Popular Transcription Resources
Audio Transcription
Transcribe Zoom Recordings & Meetings
Transcribe Video to Text
Transcribe a YouTube Video to Text
How to Convert MP3 to Text
Transcribe an Interview
Best Transcription Apps
Transcribe Podcasts to TextPodcast Transcription: Why Transcribe Your Podcast?
Best Audio Transcription Software
Transcribe MP4 Files to Text
Stay updated.
Get a weekly digest of the week’s most important transcripts in your inbox. It’s the news, without the news.


Transcription
How It Works
FAQ
Free Call Recorder
Voice Recorder App
Transcription App
Online Voice Recorder
Audio Trimmer & Cutter
Transcribe Audio to Text
Automated Transcription
Captions
How It Works
FAQ
Caption Converter
Subtitles
Foreign Subtitles
Enterprise
Security & Privacy
API
Speech to Text API
Integrations
About
Press
Careers
Freelancers
Blog
Resources
Affiliates
Influencers
Help
Transcript Library
Get in touch
1717 W 6th St.
Suite 310, Austin,
TX 78703
Contact Us
888-369-0701
support@rev.com
    
BECOME A FREELANCER
© Rev.com
Reviews | Terms | Privacy | CA Privacy | Sitemap

Skip to content
Why Rev?
Services
Solutions
Developers
Resources
Rev
Login
Get Started
« Return to Transcript Library home

Search
Dec 7, 2023

RNC Fourth Presidential Primary Debate 12/06/23 Transcript
RNC Fourth Presidential Primary Debate 12/06/23 Transcript
Rev › Blog › Transcripts › Chris Christie › RNC Fourth Presidential Primary Debate 12/06/23 Transcript
RNC Fourth Presidential Primary Debate 12/06/23. Read the transcript here.



Transcribe Your Own Content

Try Rev and save time transcribing, captioning, and subtitling.

Search the transcript here...
Megyn Kelly (00:08):
Welcome to the fourth and final Republican Presidential Primary Debate of the Year live from the University of Alabama. I’m Megyn Kelly, host of the Megyn Kelly Show podcast on SiriusXM.

Eliana Johnsons (00:23):

I’m Eliana Johnson with the Washington Free Beacon.

Elizabeth Vargas (00:26):

And I’m Elizabeth Vargas with News Nation and we are live on News Nation and the CW. It is make or break time for the candidates on this stage right now with the primary starting just weeks away and we have a lot to cover over the next two hours. So let’s begin with tonight’s rules, candidates will have 90 seconds to answer questions, 60 seconds to give a rebuttal at the moderator’s discretion. You will all see the timing lights that will indicate when time is up and it’s time to stop talking.

Eliana Johnsons (00:57):

And the time we have is critical over the next two hours, so we ask the audience to please keep your applause to a minimum.

Megyn Kelly (01:05):

All right, with that, let’s get started. On stage tonight, four candidates all vying to become their party’s nominee and given the state of affairs in our political system right now, one of you might very well do it. Even many Democrats now admit that President Biden is a weak candidate. Just as many Republicans acknowledge that former president Donald Trump’s multiple legal troubles could imperil his quest for a second term, all of which means one of you could wind up the leader of the free world. Having said that, Mr. Trump is nearly 50 points ahead of all of you in the national polls, 29 points ahead in Iowa where the GOP caucuses are less than six weeks away. And so as Republicans get ready to vote on whether any of you might be preferable to Mr. Trump, we begin with the question of electability.

(01:57)
Governor DeSantis, your campaign and its super PAC, have spent the most money, had the most high net worth donors and had a wave of momentum coming into this race after your big reelection win in Florida. You were seen by many as the candidate most likely to consolidate the non-Trump field, but here we are a month out from the first real votes and you haven’t managed to do it. In fact, Nikki Haley is beating you in New Hampshire and South Carolina now and closing in on you in Iowa. Not to mention Trump who is not only dominating in the early states but is beating you in Florida by over 30 points. Is it fair to say as Senator Tim Scott did when he dropped out that voters are telling you not no, but not now.

Ron DeSantis (02:44):

So we have a great idea in America that the voters actually make these decisions, not pundits or pollsters. I’m sick of hearing about these polls because I remember those polls in November of 2022, they said there was going to be a big red wave, it was going to be monumental and that crashed and burned. The one place it didn’t crash and burn was in the state of Florida. They weren’t predicting that I would win the way I did and I won the greatest Republican victory in the history of the state of Florida. I’m looking forward to Iowa and New Hampshire, the voters are going to be able to speak and we’re going to earn this nomination. And here’s what we need, I am sick of Republicans who are not willing to stand up and fight back against what the left is doing to this country. You’ve got to be willing to stand strong and you’ve got to be willing to beat these people.

(03:32)
I’m the only one running for president that has beaten these people on issue after issue. We beat the teacher’s unions when we did school choice, we beat Fauci on COVID. We beat George Soros when we removed two of his radical district attorneys. We beat the Democrats on election integrity. I have delivered results, that’s what we need for this country. And you have other candidates up here like Nikki Haley, she caves anytime the left comes after her, anytime the media comes after her. I did a bill in Florida to stop the gender mutilation of minors, it’s child abuse and it’s wrong. She opposes that bill. She thinks it’s fine and the law shouldn’t get involved with it. If you’re not willing to stand up for the kids, if you’re not willing to stand up and say that it is wrong to mutilate these kids, then you’re not going to fight for the people back home. I will fight for you and I will win for you.

Megyn Kelly (04:28):

Ambassador Haley, you left government service in 2018 with just $100,000 in the bank. Five years later you’re reportedly worth eight million thanks to lucrative corporate speeches and board memberships like you had with Boeing. Weeks ago, you met with Wall Street heavyweights including leaders from JP Morgan, Goldman Sachs and BlackRock. Several other billionaire investors are reportedly ready to endorse you or recently have all of which comes with expectations. Aren’t you too tight with the banks and the billionaires to win over the GOP’s working class base, which mostly wants to break the system, not elect someone beholden to it?

Nikki Haley (05:07):

Well, thank you, it’s great to be here. First I’ll tell you just to respond to Ron, he continues to lie about my record. I actually said his don’t say gay bill didn’t go far enough because it only talked about gender until the third grade and I said it shouldn’t be done at all that, that’s for parents to talk about, it shouldn’t be talked about with schools. In reference to donors coming on board. Look, we will take support from anybody we can take support from, but I have been a conservative fighter all my life. I was a Tea Party candidate when I became governor. We opposed every single corporate bailout we possibly could. We passed tort reform, we passed one of the toughest illegal immigration laws in the country. We passed pro-life bills. We moved in unemployment from 11% to 3%. We took on the unions and we took on Obama when it came to the unions, the Syrian refugees and everything in between.

(05:56)
And so I’ve had a fight and so as much as Ron says that, that’s not true, but when it comes to these corporate people that want to suddenly support us, we’ll take it. But I don’t ask them what their policies are, they ask me what my policies are and I tell them what it is. Sometimes they agree with me, sometimes they don’t. Some don’t like how tough I am on China, some don’t like the fact that I’ve signed pro-life bills, some don’t like the fact that I may oppose corporate bailouts. That doesn’t matter. That’s who I am and that’s why the most conservative grassroots group in the country, Americans for Prosperity endorsed me last week.

Ron DeSantis (06:31):

Well, [inaudible 00:06:35].

Megyn Kelly (06:31):

Go ahead.

Ron DeSantis (06:37):

Because she didn’t respond to the criticism. It wasn’t about the parents’ rights and education bill. It was about prohibiting sex change operations on minors. They do puberty blockers, these are irreversible. Talk to Chloe Cole, she went through this. Now she’s an adult. She’s warning against it. She may never be able to have kids again. That is what Nikki Haley opposed. She said the law shouldn’t get involved in that. And I just ask you, if you’re somebody that’s going to be the President of the United States and you can’t stand up against child abuse, how are you going to be able to stand up for anything?

Nikki Haley (07:08):

I never said.

Ron DeSantis (07:08):

That is the truth.

Nikki Haley (07:12):

I never said that.

Ron DeSantis (07:12):

We have it on video.

Nikki Haley (07:12):

I said that if you have to be 18 to get a tattoo, you should have to be 18 to have anything done to change your gender.

Ron DeSantis (07:19):

You said thee law should stay out of it.

Megyn Kelly (07:24):

We’re going to get to this in more detail later. Let’s finish with electability, but trust me, we’re coming back to this issue. Mr. Ramaswamy, for months you campaigned as a unifier. Then you stood up at the first debate and attacked all of your competitors as bought and paid for. The second debate, you changed your tune saying these are good people on this stage, admitting you can come across as a bit of a know-it-all and rejecting the practice of personal insults. By debate number three you called Nikki Haley, corrupt accused Ron DeSantis of wearing high heels and told Ambassador Haley, she should keep a closer eye on her daughter. Can you see how this has led some to conclude you are not in fact a unifier and to question your authenticity?

Vivek Ramaswamy (08:03):

Megyn, I think there’s a time and place for everything. We need somebody in the White House who absolutely is going to be a fighter when it counts. And I did say that there were some good people on that stage in that third debate. Doug Bergham was on that stage at that time, and I’ll say that jokingly, Ron DeSantis is a good person too. I want to go back though to Nikki Haley’s comment from earlier that she is somehow not responding to the will of these donors. Nikki, you were bankrupt when you left the UN. After you left the UN, you became a military contractor, you actually started joining service on the board of Boeing whose back you scratched for a very long time and then gave foreign multinational speeches like Hillary Clinton is and now you’re a multimillionaire. That math does not add up. It adds up to the fact that you are corrupt.

(08:48)
And when I said they were bought and paid for, I meant the Republican establishment, not the Democratic establishment. Now you have Reid Hoffman, the person who’s effectively George Soros junior, funding lawsuits across this country against Donald Trump to keep him off the ballot, funding left-wing causes. We discovered this week that he is one of Nikki Haley’s largest supporters. Larry Fink, the king of the woke industrial complex, the ESG movement, the CEO of BlackRock, the most powerful company in the world now supporting Nikki Haley. And to say that doesn’t affect her is false because it’s after that meeting later that day that she says that every American needs to be doxxed by having their ID, their government issued ID tied to what they say on the internet. So I think that this is far more corrupt than I even imagined when I entered politics, but I will say this, it is going to take a leader from the outside with fresh legs from the next generation to unite this country. Not the broken politicians who are puppets of the puppet masters, but the actual people in this country.

(09:52)
Thomas Jefferson was 33 when he wrote the Declaration of Independence. I think it’s going to take somebody whose best days in life are still ahead to see a country whose best days are ahead of itself and I think I can reach that next generation better than anybody else in this race.

Megyn Kelly (10:08):

Thank you. Response?

Nikki Haley (10:14):

Megyn, first of all, we weren’t bankrupt when I left the UN. We’re people of service, my husband is in the military and I served our country as UN ambassador and governor. It may be bankrupt to him, but it certainly wasn’t bankrupt to us. Secondly, I did serve on the board of Boeing. I did a lot of work with Boeing when I was governor, they were a great partner to me. I served for 10 months and then when they decided after COVID that they wanted to go for a corporate bailout, I’ve never supported corporate bailout, so I respectfully stepped back and got off the board. I love Boeing. They build good commercial airplanes. They build airplanes for our Air force. I’m proud of them. They employ a lot of people in South Carolina, but that’s why I left the Boeing board. There’s nothing to what he’s saying. And in terms of these donors that are supporting me, they’re just jealous. They wish that they were supporting them, but I’m not going to sit there and-

Ron DeSantis (11:02):

Oh, give me a break.

Megyn Kelly (11:03):

Hold on, let me get the governor in and then I’ll go… Go, Governor deSantis. Are you jealous?

Ron DeSantis (11:03):

So Vivek, he wrote a book talking about ESG and these woke corporations in BlackRock. The idea that I want to do that in Florida, they were managing part of our pension and then when they did the ESG, I took $2 billion away from BlackRock. We took action. This ESG, they call it environment social governance, and again, Nikki is meeting with all these people, they want to use economic power to impose a left-wing agenda on this country. They want basically to change society without having to go through the constitutional process. We’ve knee capped it in the state of Florida. The next President of the United States needs to be able to go to that office on day one and end ESG. And the fact of the matter is we know from her history, Nikki will cave to those big donors when it counts and that is not accepted.

Nikki Haley (11:53):

[inaudible 00:11:55].

Megyn Kelly (11:53):

Quick, quick, quick.

Vivek Ramaswamy (11:58):

I did write that book Ron and the irony is Nikki Haley was heaping praise on me when I wrote that book, but now I worry… I was warning about the woke industrial complex in this country as a warning, apparently she read it as a how-to manual, just like she reads George Orwell’s books-

Megyn Kelly (12:14):

Okay, all right. Standby.

Vivek Ramaswamy (12:14):

… as well. And so I think that that’s actually far more dangerous than… This is really important for people to understand, we’re marching towards fascism under Biden. Jack Smith has subpoenaed every last retweet that someone has issued from Donald Trump in the year 2020. The only person more fascist than the Biden regime now is Nikki Haley, who thinks the government should identify every one of those individuals with an ID that is not freedom, that is fascism and she should come nowhere near the levers of power, let alone the White House.

Megyn Kelly (12:42):

I’ve got to get to Governor Christie, I haven’t forgotten about you.

Nikki Haley (12:44):

No, but can I just say-

Megyn Kelly (12:45):

Can you speak to-

Chris Christie (12:46):

I really appreciate that.

Megyn Kelly (12:47):

How are you doing, sir?

Chris Christie (12:47):

Good. Good to see you.

Megyn Kelly (12:48):

Can you please speak to the requirement that you said that every anonymous internet user needs to out themselves, they’re both hitting you on it.

Nikki Haley (12:57):

I would be happy to and I love all the attention fellas, thank you for that. I’ll say this, what I said was that social media companies need to show us their algorithms. I also said there are millions of bots on social media right now. They’re foreign, they’re Chinese, they’re Iranian, I will always fight for freedom of speech for Americans. We do not need freedom of speech for Russians and Iranians and Hamas. We need-

Vivek Ramaswamy (13:23):

That’s not what you said.

Nikki Haley (13:24):

… social media companies to go and-

Vivek Ramaswamy (13:25):

That’s a lie.

Nikki Haley (13:26):

… fight back on all of these bots that are happening, that’s what I said. As a mom, do I think that social media would be more civil if we went and had people’s names next to that? Yes, I do think that because I think we’ve got too much cyber bullying, I think we’ve got child pornography and all of those things, but having said that, I never said government should go and require anyone’s name.

Vivek Ramaswamy (13:47):

That’s false.

Ron DeSantis (13:48):

She said, I want your name.

Vivek Ramaswamy (13:50):

She absolutely said it.

Ron DeSantis (13:50):

As President of the United States, her first day in office, she said, one of the first things I’m going to do-

Nikki Haley (13:55):

I said we were going to get the millions of bots-

Ron DeSantis (13:57):

… all social medias, I want your name. That’s what she said.

Vivek Ramaswamy (13:57):

She want government ID to dox every American.

Ron DeSantis (14:00):

[inaudible 00:14:00]. That’s what she said, you can roll the tapes. She said, I want your name. And that was going to be one of the first things she did in office, and then she got real serious blow back and understandably so because it’d be a massive expansion of government. We have anonymous speech, the Federalist papers were written with anonymous writers, Jay Madison and Hamilton, they went under publius. It’s something that’s important, and especially given how conservatives have been attacked and they’ve lost jobs and they’ve been canceled, you know the regime would use that to weaponize that against our own people. It was a bad idea, and she should own that truth.

Nikki Haley (14:31):

[inaudible 00:14:32].

Megyn Kelly (14:31):

Let me give you 15 seconds and then there is the former governor of New Jersey who deserves some time.

Nikki Haley (14:39):

This cracks me up because Ron so hypocritical because he actually went and tried to push a law that would stop anonymous people from talking to the press and went so far to say bloggers should have to register with the state if they’re going to write about elected officials. It was in the check your newspaper, it was absolutely there.

Ron DeSantis (14:57):

Some legislator.

Vivek Ramaswamy (15:00):

She reveals her ammunition [inaudible 00:15:00] on your constitutional rights.

Megyn Kelly (15:01):

You can come up to it later.

Vivek Ramaswamy (15:02):

This is more dangerous than the Democrats.

Nikki Haley (15:03):

You’re lying.

Megyn Kelly (15:03):

This section’s over. Okay, governor Christie.

Chris Christie (15:06):

Really?

Megyn Kelly (15:07):

Just that piece.

Chris Christie (15:09):

I’m usually not somebody who gets missed, but okay, let’s go.

Megyn Kelly (15:11):

What’s happening? Okay, I got you. Listen, you endorsed Donald Trump in 2016 and 2020. You gave him an A for his first term, since then, however you’ve turned on him, calling him a liar, a loser, a con man, and someone who cannot win. You’ve even said that you got into this race just to stop President Trump, his approval rating with Republicans is currently at 81%, yours is at 25. Your best state is New Hampshire, and even there, two thirds of GOP voters say they would be angry and disappointed if you won. Respectfully, Governor, you have not stopped Mr. Trump and voters may wonder how you could possibly become the nominee of a party that does not appear to like you very much.

Chris Christie (15:54):

Yeah, well look Megyn, it’s often very difficult to be the only person on the stage who’s telling the truth and the only person who is taking on what needs to be taken on. I look at my watch now, we’re 17 minutes into this debate and except for your little speech in the beginning we’ve had these three acting as if the race is between the four of us. The fifth guy who doesn’t have the guts to show up and stand here, he’s the one who, as you just put it, is way ahead in the polls. And yet I’ve got these three guys who are all seemingly to compete with Voldemort, he who shall not be named. They don’t want to talk about it. The fact is that when you go and you say the truth about somebody who is a dictator, a bully who has taken shots at everybody, whether they’ve given him great service or not, over time, who dares to disagree with him, then I understand why these three are timid to say anything about it.

(16:56)
Maybe it’s ’cause they have future aspirations, maybe those future aspirations are now, or maybe they’re four years from now. But the fact of the matter is the truth needs to be told. And for us to go 17 minutes without discussing the guy who has all those gaudy numbers you talked about is ridiculous. I’m in this race because the truth needs to be spoken, he is unfit. This is a guy who just said this past week that he wants to use the Department of Justice to go after his enemies when he gets in there. And the fact of the matter is he’s unfit to be president and there is no bigger issue in this race, Megyn than Donald Trump. And those numbers prove it.

Elizabeth Vargas (17:35):

Governor Christie, we will be addressing that issue of Donald Trump in just a moment. But I’d like to first get to some questions on Israel. Governor DeSantis, tonight as we speak, the war is back on in Gaza, Israeli tanks are on the move and have surrounded the home of the leader of Hamas. Eight Americans have been held hostage in the tunnels beneath Gaza for 60 days now, American troops and warships in the Middle East are under attack. How far would you go as president to secure the release of those eight American hostages and would it include sending American forces into combat?

Ron DeSantis (18:13):

We have to look out for our people when there are hostages, commander in chief, you have to do whatever you can to get them done. But the overall issue with this is this administration is trying to hobble Israel from being able to defend itself. They have a right to eliminate Hamas and win a total and complete victory so that they never have to deal with this again. Hamas wants nothing less than a second Holocaust, they would wipe off every single Jew off the map. They would destroy the state of Israel if we could. Joe Biden will say they support Israel and then they do nothing but try to kneecap them every step of the way. You should not try to direct their war effort, we should work together with them so that they can bring Hamas to heal.

(18:54)
Look, I served in Iraq back in the day. I’m the only one running for president that served in the military, I understand that part of the world. It’s not the best part of the world. We do have troops there that Biden is leaving basically as sitting ducks and you have the Iranians that are attacking these troops and he’s responding with basically pinpricks. If you harm an American service member, you’re going to have hell to pay when I’m president, we are not going to let our troops be sitting ducks. We also need to look at what’s the underlying problem here, Iran. Biden is doing nothing to bring Iran to account, you got to turn the screws on them, don’t let them have any oil revenue. The money they get, they send to Hamas, they send to Hezbollah and they foment jihad throughout the Middle East. So Biden has empowered Iran just like he’s empowered other adversaries. We stand with Israel, they’re our best ally in the Middle East, we have a unique relationship with them. And you will see a strong relationship when I’m the President of the United States.

Elizabeth Vargas (19:51):

But would you send American troops?

Chris Christie (19:55):

This is [inaudible 00:19:53]. This is the problem with the first three debates, Ron gets asked a question and he doesn’t answer it. Your question was very specific, you said, would you send American troops as commander in chief? And he went on to this minute and 30 second hosanna about his knowledge of the military and what we need to do and didn’t answer your question. Look, when your President of the United States, you’re not going to have a choice whether to answer that question or not. Your generals, your Secretary of Defense, your Secretary of State, your National Security Advisor are going to present plans to you. They’re going to look at you and say, “Do we go or don’t we, Mr. President?” And you can’t give a 90-second speech about your military services. Honorable as it is.

Elizabeth Vargas (20:35):

So would you send American troops in to rescue those hostages?

Chris Christie (20:36):

I would, absolutely. Absolutely. If they had a plan which showed me that we could get them out safely, you’re damn right I’d send the American Army in there to get our people home and get them home now, and I’ll answer that question directly.

Elizabeth Vargas (20:50):

Thank you Governor Christie.

Eliana Johnsons (20:53):

Mr. Ramaswamy, you have said it was irresponsible for Ambassador Haley to call Hamas’ terrorist rampage an attack on America. And for her to quote rabidly shout, “Finish them.” The Hamas terror attack left dozens of Americans dead and was the deadliest attack on Jews since the Holocaust. Why wouldn’t it be a good thing to finish? Hamas,

Vivek Ramaswamy (21:17):

Finish them was purposefully vague in a discussion that included Iran, which is what I objected to. And I think it’s as US president, you have to be responsible. What happened to Israel was dead wrong, what Hamas did was medieval. It was subhuman, it was immoral. And we have to call that out for what it is on October 7th. But to say that that was an attack on America fails a basic test. I mean, Nikki, if you can’t tell the difference between where Israel is in the US is on a map, I can have my three-year-old son show you the difference. That is irresponsible because it has major consequences because that doesn’t leave room for what actually is an attack on America. So I believe I have the strongest pro-Israel position actually on the stage, even though it’s a little bit different than the standard GOP talking points.

(22:00)
And it is this, the founding vision of Israel, David Ben-Gurion, the George Washington figure of Israel. What did he believe he believed that we don’t want as Israel to depend on the fleeting sympathies of the West and have our hands tied. I think Israel has an absolute right to defend itself to the fullest, without the US the UN or the EU or anybody else, second guessing their decisions as the Biden administration, guess what, is now starting to do. I think that’s a more deeply pro-Israel position than anybody else. And it keeps the actual lines of accountability clear because it is a pro-American position. And as leader of the United States of America, just as a father of two sons, my sole moral duty is to my family. As your next president, my sole moral duty is to you, the people of this country. That’s how I’m going to lead. So I’ll tell Bibi, you smoke the terrorists on your southern border, you go ahead and we’re rooting for you. We’re going to smoke the terrorists on our own southern border and that’s how I’m going to lead this country.

Ron DeSantis (22:56):

But Americans, we were killed in that attack.

Eliana Johnsons (22:57):

Thank you, Mr. Ramaswamy.

Ron DeSantis (22:59):

Americans were killed in that attack. And so if you looked at this terrorist attack and the number of Americans, this would be one of the top 10 terrorist attacks in American history. So our own people were killed in that attack. And I think it’s absolutely appropriate to point that out and to say that we’re in this together and we are going to work with Israel so that these people are brought to justice.

Vivek Ramaswamy (23:20):

I agree with that.

Eliana Johnsons (23:22):

Ambassador Haley, I’m coming to you. Iran is on the threshold of becoming a nuclear state. The Wall Street Journal reported that Iranian military leaders gave the green light for Hamas’ attack on Israel. You said in last month’s debate that by contrast to the Biden administration’s approach to Iran, you would, “Punch them once and punch them hard.” Were you saying that it’s time to bomb Iran?

Nikki Haley (23:47):

No, I was not saying it’s time to bomb Iran. But I will tell you, I dealt with Iran every day when I was at the United Nations and they only respond to strength. What they don’t respond to is when you weaken the sanctions like they did on Iran that allowed China to send them billions to fill their proxies, what they don’t respond to is when you give $6 billion for five hostages, that only makes them want more hostages. What they don’t respond to is when they do 140 strikes on our men and women in Syria and Iraq and we do nothing but just some small shots back. You’ve got to punch them, you’ve got to punch them hard and let them know that, that’s the only way they’re going to respond. So the way you do that is you go after their infrastructure in Syria and Iraq where they’re hitting our soldiers. That’s what you do, and then that’s when they’ll back off.

(24:33)
The problem is you have to see that all of these are related. If you look at the fact Russia was losing that war with Ukraine, Putin had hit rock bottom, they had raised the draft age to 65, he was getting drones and missiles, drones from Iran, missiles from North Korea. And so what happened when he hit rock bottom, all of a sudden his other friend Iran, Hamas goes and invades Israel and butchers those people on Putin’s birthday. There is no one happier right now than Putin because all of the attention America had on Ukraine suddenly went to Israel. And that’s what they were hoping is going to happen. We need to make sure that we have full clarity that there is a reason again that Taiwanese want to help Ukrainians because they know if Ukraine wins, China won’t invade Taiwan. There’s a reason the Ukrainians want to help Israelis because they know that if Iran wins, Russia wins, these are all connected. But what wins all of that is a strong America, not a weak America, and that’s what Joe Biden’s given us.

Vivek Ramaswamy (25:35):

I want to say one thing about the tie to Ukraine, if I may. So foreign policy experience is not the same as foreign policy wisdom. I want everybody at home to note that I was the first person to say we need a reasonable peace deal in Ukraine. Now, a lot of the neocons are quietly coming along to that position with the exceptions of Nikki Haley and Joe Biden who still support this, what I believe is pointless war in Ukraine. And I think those with foreign policy experience, one thing that Joe Biden and Nikki Haley have in common is that neither of them could even state for you three provinces in Eastern Ukraine that they want to send our troops to actually fight for. Look at that. This is what I want people to understand. I mean she has no idea what the hell the names of those provinces are, but she wants to send our sons and daughters and our troops and our military equipment to go fight it.

(26:24)
So reject this myth that they’ve been selling you, that somebody had a cup of coffee stint at the UN and then makes eight million bucks after has real foreign policy experience. It takes an outsider to see this through. Look at the blank expression, she doesn’t know the names of the provinces that she wants to actually fight for. And there’s [inaudible 00:26:40] the donors right there that are playing [inaudible 00:26:43].

Chris Christie (26:43):

Enough. Enough.

Megyn Kelly (26:43):

Okay, hold on. Hold on.

Chris Christie (26:45):

Let me just say something here. His reasonable peace deal in Ukraine, he made it clear, give them all the land they’ve already stolen. Promise Putin, you’ll never put Ukraine in Russia and then trust Putin not to have a relationship with China. Let tell you something, that’s no reasonable-

Vivek Ramaswamy (27:04):

That’s not my deal. That’s not my deal, Chris.

Chris Christie (27:05):

Yes, it’s exactly what you said.

Vivek Ramaswamy (27:06):

I’ll describe my deal.

Chris Christie (27:07):

You do this at every debate.

Vivek Ramaswamy (27:08):

I’ll tell you exactly what it-

Chris Christie (27:10):

Don’t interrupt me, I didn’t interrupt you. Okay, you say this-

Vivek Ramaswamy (27:12):

Tell me about how you want to send our kids to die, go for it.

Megyn Kelly (27:13):

Mr. Ramaswamy.

Chris Christie (27:15):

You do this at every debate, you go out on the stump and you say something. All of us see it on video, we confront you out on the debate stage, you say you didn’t say it and then you back away. And I want to say what?

Vivek Ramaswamy (27:26):

I’ll tell exactly what I said, Chris.

Chris Christie (27:27):

I’m not done yet.

Vivek Ramaswamy (27:28):

Well, this is-

Chris Christie (27:28):

Now, look-

Megyn Kelly (27:29):

Hold on.

Vivek Ramaswamy (27:31):

[inaudible 00:27:30], this man is spewing nonsense.

Chris Christie (27:33):

Let me say something. This is the fourth debate, the fourth debate that you would be voted in the first 20 minutes as the most obnoxious blowhard in America. So shut up for a little while.

Vivek Ramaswamy (27:44):

I’m going to respond to that.

Chris Christie (27:45):

I want to say something-

Vivek Ramaswamy (27:50):

What’s your version on [inaudible 00:27:51].

Megyn Kelly (27:50):

We’re going to let you respond, let him finish.

Chris Christie (27:50):

I want to say something else. We’re now 25 minutes into this debate. And he has insulted Nikki Haley’s basic intelligence, not her positions, her basic intelligence. She doesn’t know regions, she wouldn’t be able to find something on a map that his three-year-old could find. Look, if you want to disagree on issues, that’s fine. And Nikki and I disagree on some issues, but I’ll tell you this, I’ve known her for 12 years, which is longer than he’s even started to vote in a Republican primary. And while we disagree about some issues and we disagree about who should be President of the United States, what we don’t disagree on is this is a smart, accomplished woman and you should stop insulting her.

Vivek Ramaswamy (28:34):

So I’m going to take this… I’m going to take several times over. So first of all, I think we’ve just learned something from Chris Christie. We learned three things-

Megyn Kelly (28:39):

Hold on. Go head.

Vivek Ramaswamy (28:44):

We learned three things right there. First of all, Chris Christie also doesn’t know what provinces in Eastern Ukraine, he actually wants us to fight for. Chris, your version of foreign policy experience was closing a bridge from New Jersey to New York. So do everybody a favor, just walk yourself off that stage, enjoy a nice meal and get the hell out this place. When it comes to Nikki, I think if you’re going to actually send your sons and daughters to go die in somebody else’s war-

Chris Christie (29:09):

While you weren’t voting-

Megyn Kelly (29:09):

Hold on.

Vivek Ramaswamy (29:10):

Excuse me, Chris, I’m speaking and I’m not done yet.

Chris Christie (29:12):

I haven’t heard a time when you aren’t speaking.

Vivek Ramaswamy (29:13):

You had your chance, and we’re going to be done. So listen up to this is if these people want to send your sons and daughters to go die in Ukraine, they’ve been arguing for it for a year, $200 billion of our taxpayer money sent over. Neither of them could even name for you the provinces that they actually want to protect. And this is the people who have been touting their so-called foreign policy experience. It is intellectual fraud. These people are lying to you. The same people who told you about weapons and mass destruction in Iraq to justify that invasion, didn’t know the first thing about it, yet they sent thousands of our sons and daughters to go die. The same people who told you the same in Afghanistan, where the Taliban is still in charge. 20 years later, seven trillion of our national debt due to these toxic neocons. You can put lipstick on a Dick Cheney, it is still a fascist neocon.

Megyn Kelly (00:00):

 

Vivek Ramaswamy (29:59):

And you have to see that today.

Megyn Kelly (29:59):

Thank you Mr. Ramaswamy.

Vivek Ramaswamy (29:59):

It’s Dick Cheney

Megyn Kelly (29:59):

Thank-

Elizabeth Vargas (30:00):

Thank you, Mr. Ramaswamy.

Vivek Ramaswamy (30:02):

And you got to see that today.

Elizabeth Vargas (30:02):

Thank you Mr. Ramaswamy.

Vivek Ramaswamy (30:02):

Dick Cheney all over again in this party.

Elizabeth Vargas (30:03):

Thank you Mr. Ramaswamy. 15 seconds.

Vivek Ramaswamy (30:08):

Name the provinces. Neither of you could even name [inaudible 00:30:11]-

Elizabeth Vargas (30:10):

Mr. Ramaswamy, thank you.

Nikki Haley (30:10):

[inaudible 00:30:12]-

Ron DeSantis (30:12):

I think we’ve had enough of this.

Chris Christie (30:12):

[inaudible 00:30:13].

Nikki Haley (30:12):

[inaudible 00:30:13] and Crimea.

Vivek Ramaswamy (30:12):

[inaudible 00:30:13].

Chris Christie (30:12):

Let me say-

Vivek Ramaswamy (30:12):

Actually, Crimea is the wrong answer, Nikki.

Megyn Kelly (30:12):

All right. The floor is Christie’s.

Chris Christie (30:20):

All right, let me just say this. This is the kind of thing where he talks about experience. I was the US attorney in New Jersey when the terrorist attacks were launched against the United States in 2001. I brought the first two cases in this country against terrorists who tried to attack us again and I know about the threat of terrorism and bullying in this country and around the world, and at that time, he was learning about the provinces in Ukraine sitting with his smart-ass mouth at Harvard. That’s what was going on. And so the fact of the matter is, and back then he was a Democrat, so the fact is-

Vivek Ramaswamy (31:02):

[inaudible 00:31:03].

Chris Christie (31:03):

The fact is that all he knows how to do-

Vivek Ramaswamy (31:04):

While you’re busy hugging Barack Obama getting him elected.

Chris Christie (31:06):

All he knows how to do-

Elizabeth Vargas (31:07):

Thank you.

Chris Christie (31:07):

All he knows how to do is insult good people who have committed their lives to public service and not say anything that moves the ball down the field for the United States.

Elizabeth Vargas (31:16):

All right, thank you Governor Christie. We are going to take a quick break, cool things down a little bit. When we come back, we’re going to tackle issues on the southern border. We’ll be back in a few minutes.

Speaker 2 (31:34):

Santa’s coming soon. Have you finished your Christmas shopping? Get 15% off your entire purchase at the official GOP store when you text Santa to 80810, but hurry, order by December 8th to get your presents under the tree in time.

Speaker 1 (31:54):

Who do you think will win the debate? Text your answer to 80810.

Speaker 3 (32:07):

If you’re not careful where you put your savings, the government can essentially rob you in plain sight. Former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan warned us when he said, “Deficit spending is simply a scheme for the confiscation of wealth.” He’s right, deficit spending can cause inflation, which eats away at your savings even if you don’t see it at first. Is there a solution? Yes, Greenspan thought so when he said, “Gold stands in the way of this insidious process.” This is where Birch Gold Group comes in. You see, Greenspan understood that true wealth preservation can come from physical assets like gold. We’ve helped Americans diversify their IRA or 401(k) into gold for over 20 years. To get a free info kit from Birch Gold, text NOW to 989898 now. This is our gift to you. There’s no obligation and nothing to buy, just free info to help you. You diversify your hard- earned savings. Text NOW to 989898 right now.

Speaker 4 (33:04):

The Wellness Company and their doctors are medical professionals you can trust, and their new medical emergency kits are the gold standard when it comes to keeping you safe and healthy. This medical emergency kit contains an assortment of life-saving medications, including Ivermectin Z-Pak. Rest assured knowing that you have emergency antibiotics, antivirals, and antiparasitics on hand to help you and your family stay safe from whatever life throws at you next.

Kevin Sorbo (33:30):

Do you owe over $10,000 in back taxes? Kevin Sorbo here with an important message. The Biden administration has proposed an $80 billion plan to boost IRS collections. This means they could garnish your wages, levy your bank account, and even seize your property. Tax Network USA, a trusted tax firm can help protect your income and assets today while quickly settling your tax debt, but you have to act now while you still have options. Call Tax Network USA today.

Speaker 5 (34:07):

I have not taken a penny from any foreign source ever in my life. My son has not made money in terms of this thing about… What are you talking about? China.

Speaker 6 (34:37):

Meet Rumble. Rumble was founded on the principle of unfiltered access to diverse ideas. Rumble offers a chance to discover America’s independent voices free from algorithms and sensors. Participate in bold discussions and help protect a free and open internet. Rumble, bold and free. Visit rumble.com and download the app today.

Speaker 3 (35:06):

Did you know the government can essentially rob you in plain sight? Former Fed chair Alan Greenspan warned, “Deficit spending is simply a scheme for the confiscation of wealth,” but he added, “Gold stands in the way of this insidious process.” Birch Gold Group has helped thousands of Americans diversify their IRA or 401(k) into gold. To get a free info kit from Birch Gold, text NOW to 989898. Again, text NOW to 989898 right now.

Elizabeth Vargas (36:03):

Welcome back to the Republican primary debate live on NewsNation from Tuscaloosa, Alabama. We are now going to go to the crisis on the southern border. Polls show immigration and the crisis are among the most pressing issues for Republican voters right now, both the issue of migrants crossing illegally into our country and the separate issue of fentanyl being smuggled in mostly through legal ports of entry. All year, NewsNation has been at the border documenting the crisis. In 2023 alone, border patrol encountered a record 2.4 million migrants. All four of you have talked tough. The question now is how realistic is the talk? So Governor DeSantis, I’d like to start with you. You have pledged to send the military to the southern border on day one of your administration with orders to shoot, “Stone cold dead anyone illegally entering with a backpack that you believe contains fentanyl.” Critics have called this a shoot first ask questions later policy that would amount to extrajudicial killing. You are a former military lawyer. Why do you think this idea of yours would be legal?

Ron DeSantis (37:14):

The drug cartels are invading our country and they are killing our citizens by the tens of thousands every year. We had a situation in Florida, there was an 18-month-old baby that was crawling on the floor of an Airbnb rental, there was fentanyl residue on the carpet and the baby died. Is this acceptable in this country? I know the elites in DC, they don’t care. They don’t care that fentanyl is ravaging your community. They don’t care that illegal aliens are ravaging our community and overwhelming our community. The commander in chief not only has a right, you have a responsibility to fight back against these people. We’re-

Elizabeth Vargas (37:50):

And does that mean shooting first?

Ron DeSantis (37:51):

It means you’re going to categorize them as foreign terrorist organizations and we will identify… Just like we would anywhere. When I was in Iraq, Al-Qaeda wasn’t wearing a uniform. You’d see anyone walking down the street, they all had man dresses on. You didn’t know if someone had a bomb, an IED attached or not. And so, you had to make a judgment based on intelligence, based on positive identification, but we’re going to be able to get the intelligence on these cartel people. And here’s the thing, if we had a wall across the southern border, which I support, this would not have happened.

(38:24)
We need to build a wall across the southern border. I’ll get it done and I’ll make for… Mexico is supposed to pay for it, remember. Here’s how you do that. I’m going to have fees on remittances from foreign workers when they send the money back to foreign countries, we’re going to tax it, and we’re going to build the wall with that. So yes, you should have had that, but we don’t have it, I’m going to build it, but we have to lean in on this problem. I am not going to sit there and allow mothers to lose more kids because of fentanyl overdose. I am not going to sit there and let sex trafficking go unabated or human trafficking go unabated. There’s going to be a new sheriff in town and these drug cartels better buckle up.

Elizabeth Vargas (39:04):

Thank you. Ambassador Haley, you have pledged to catch and deport all migrants who are here in this country illegally, but then you said in Londonderry, New Hampshire last month that you will not deport those who are working and paying taxes rather than feeding off the system, which is it?

Nikki Haley (39:21):

So first of all, what I said is all of the seven or 8 million illegals that have come under Biden’s watch absolutely have to go back. We have to stop the incentive of what’s bringing them over here in the first place. Biden just gave temporary protective status to 500,000 Venezuelans. That’s a half a million social security cards, that’s a half a million driver’s licenses, and I know from my time at the United Nations, the first thing they do is pick up the phone and said, “We came over, come on over,” and that’s what sends more. You have to go and deport these people, so they know it can’t happen again. For those that have been here longer than that, we’ve got to start seeing, who is it? How long have they been here? Have they been vetted? Have they paid taxes? Have they been working? And figure out who else is out there.

(40:07)
But what I know is my parents came here legally, they put in the time, they put in the price, they are offended by those that are coming illegally. We can’t let them skip the line, but when you talk about fentanyl like you did before, let’s look at something else. Yes, I think we should send special operations over and take out the cartels. I think we should do a remain in Mexico policy, so they never step foot in US soil in the first place, but look at where fentanyl came from. Let’s go to the heart of the matter. It came from China.

(40:36)
That’s why we need to end all normal trade relations with China until they stop murdering Americans with fentanyl. I promise you, they need our economy. They will immediately stop that, but this is where Trump went wrong. Trump was good on trade, but that’s all he was with China because here he allowed fentanyl to continue to come over. He continued to allow them to take… He would give them technology that would build up their military and hurt us. He allowed the Chinese infiltration for them to buy up farmland, to put money in our universities, and to continue to do things that were harmful for America. We now have a spy base in Cuba and police stations and Trump didn’t do anything about it.

Elizabeth Vargas (41:14):

Thank you.

Ron DeSantis (41:15):

[inaudible 00:41:15] from China though. Listen, this is rich because when she was governor of South Carolina, she was the number one ranked governor of bringing the CCP into her state. She wrote a love letter to the Chinese ambassador saying how great a friend China is. You can look at it. We put it on our website, rondesantis. com. There’s also a video of her as governor standing in front of a Chinese flag with a Chinese business saying that she now works for them, talking about this Chinese company. So, she’s been very weak on China. Now, here’s the problem, the rhetoric is different, but… One, her donors, these Wall Street liberal donors, they make money in China. They are not going to let her be tough on China and she will cave to the donor. She will not stand up for you.

Elizabeth Vargas (41:57):

15 seconds, ambassador.

Nikki Haley (42:02):

First of all, he’s mad because those Wall Street donors used to support him and now they support me. The second thing is he has a Chinese company, [inaudible 00:42:11], that he just did a rally there last year. They have given you 340,000 in campaign donations-

Ron DeSantis (42:18):

It’s an American company.

Nikki Haley (42:18):

… Between them and their employees. They are tied to the Communist-

Ron DeSantis (42:22):

It’s an American company.

Nikki Haley (42:23):

… Chinese Party.

Elizabeth Vargas (42:23):

Thank you.

Nikki Haley (42:24):

JinkoSolar is another one. They went and expanded. You gave 2 million in subsidies and they-

Ron DeSantis (42:28):

I banned China from buying land in the state of Florida.

Nikki Haley (42:30):

And the Department of Homeland-

Ron DeSantis (42:31):

I ejected the Confucius Institute. Nikki Haley brought Confucius Institutes to the universities in South Carolina.

Nikki Haley (42:38):

That is not true.

Ron DeSantis (42:39):

I ejected them, so I have a record of standing up and doing what’s right, and here’s the thing-

Nikki Haley (42:42):

You have a record of lying.

Ron DeSantis (42:43):

She’s trying to say things like that, even the liberal media groups that usually if I say the sky is blue, they’ll fact check me and say that’s wrong. They looked at her charges, they said it was totally false, that they could not find one instance of me recruiting a Chinese business coming to Florida.

Elizabeth Vargas (42:57):

Thank you.

Ron DeSantis (42:58):

You know why? Because we never recruited any Chinese businesses in the state of Florida.

Elizabeth Vargas (43:02):

Thank you. Mr. Ramaswamy, over the past year, fentanyl has killed more than 75,000 Americans, 1,000 of them right here in Alabama. You have vowed to use the military to “annihilate drug labs inside Mexico”, something the president of Mexico said would be a hostile act, but fentanyl can easily be made anywhere and labs that are shut down can easily and quickly be replaced. Are your tough enforcement policies offering false hope to a country racked by addiction?

Vivek Ramaswamy (43:33):

To the contrary, I don’t think it’s going to have to come to that if we deal with the actual demand side problem that we also have in this country. The easy part is talking about how we’re going to use our military to secure the border. I will and I believe that everybody else wants to do the same thing, but the harder part is dealing with the crisis of purpose and meaning, the mental health epidemic raging across this country like wildfire. And there’s a reason why after the opioid crisis you see fentanyl and even after we get fentanyl and we are going to be sure to make sure we do it, this one is worse for many reasons, they’re illegally lacing it into pharmaceuticals, so it’s more dangerous, but we’re deluding ourselves. The real false promise here is thinking that we’re going to have dealt with that underlying mental health epidemic in this country by just dealing with the demand side of it.

(44:18)
But I want to get back to this issue of the root cause because a lot of these are coming from labs in Wuhan, China of all places, drug materials that are going to the Mexican drug cartels that they’re pumping across that southern border like a modern opium war. I think it is going to take a US president that’s going to have a very different conversation with Xi Jinping than what Joe Biden just had in California.

(44:39)
I’ll tell Xi Jinping, “You will not only not buy land in this country or donate to universities in this country, US businesses won’t expand into the Chinese market until they’re playing by the same set of rules.” And the same country that’s putting fentanyl into illegal pharmaceuticals in Mexico, it’s no coincidence is the exact same country that also unleashed hell on the world with the COVID-19 pandemic. We also have to hold them accountable with every financial lever that we have available.

Elizabeth Vargas (45:07):

Thank you.

Vivek Ramaswamy (45:07):

That is what it actually means to stand with a spine, and you mark my words, if we’re willing to stand with a spine, China will absolutely have to fold because they’re in a tougher spot than we are. And then we’re back to playing by the same set of rules, that’s the answer.

Eliana Johnsons (45:18):

Thank you, Mr. Ramaswamy. Thank you. Let’s talk about the economy. Ambassador Haley, homeownership has always been part of the American dream, but it’s increasingly out of reach for younger Americans. This year, mortgage rates reached 30-year highs. Home prices have risen $190,000 over the past decade. Is this the free market at work or should the federal government do something to make homes more affordable?

Nikki Haley (45:47):

Well, first of all, you’re exactly right. My daughter just got married and I saw how hard it was for her and her husband to buy a home. Right now, the average homeowner in America is 49 years old. You’ve got young people everywhere, that used to be the American dream and now it’s out of reach, but you look at what happened. You first of all look at what the Fed did. The Fed did a terrible job when they allowed all of that money to go through. You saw the Treasury bond rates go up, that affected mortgage rates, that affected automobile rates, that affected insurance rates, and so now we have a high interest rate. You’ve got a supply issue. Ask any builder, the supply issues have continued to be there. That’s caused the rate to go up, and then you’ve got insurances that have gone up.

(46:29)
And so, what you have is a lot of younger people who one, can’t afford a home, but two, the banks aren’t lending them any money. They’ve made the regulations so hard that they don’t want to give loans on mortgages anymore. So, what we have to do is we have to open it up. We have to one, grow our economy, so that people have more money in their pockets. We’ve got to look at the supply chain and make sure that we are funneling that, so that builders don’t have to sit there and go overseas to find things. And then we need to make sure that we really stop paying down this debt, make sure that we stop the borrowing, stop the spending. I’ll veto any spending bill that doesn’t take us back to pre-COVID levels because our kids are not going to forgive us for all the spending that happened. And as much as everybody wants to talk about how Donald Trump had a good economy, $9 trillion in debt he did just in four years, and we’re all paying the price of that, including those mortgage prices.

Eliana Johnsons (47:23):

We’re going to come back to President Trump, I promise. Governor DeSantis, the latest NewsNation decision desk poll found that inflation tops the worries of American voters. 61% say their very concerned and the working class is hardest hit. Economists say this was fueled by a glut of federal spending. The Biden administration has added $6 trillion to the national debt so far, but President Trump wasn’t exactly a penny pincher. His administration added 7.8 trillion. Do Republicans, including President Trump, share the blame for inflation? And what concrete steps would a president DeSantis take to help Americans make ends meet?

Ron DeSantis (48:05):

The borrowing, printing and spending of money was both parties in Washington DC. That’s just a fact. These Republicans in Washington have spent, it’s driven your prices higher, and it’s driven your interest rates to the point where you can’t afford… I met a young fellow in Iowa, he had graduated college a couple years ago and he’s like, “Governor, I don’t have a chance. I’m gainfully employed.” He’s like, “I have no chance to afford a home and start a family,” that is taking the American dream away from people. So, we’re going to get the inflation down, we’re going to get the interest rates down, we are going to reduce spending, and I will be willing to veto and I vetoed a lot as governor of Florida and we’ll do that. We’re also going to open up all of our domestic energy for production, lower your gas prices, lower the price of fuel.

(48:46)
That’s going to help the economy, it’ll also help jobs and we’ll do it, but another thing that’s burdening young people are these student loans. Now, I don’t support having a truck driver having to pay a student loan for someone that got a degree in gender studies. That is wrong, we should not have taxpayers do that. What I’m going to do though is I’m going to get to the root cause of the problem. These student loans are going to be backed by the universities because they need to have an incentive to produce gainful employment for people. They should not be indulging in ideological studies. They should be focusing on things that work, and we’re going to take some of this money and we’re going to move it to actual vocational training. In Florida, we doubled apprenticeships. We have more truck drivers, these are in-demand skills. Don’t let anybody tell you that the only way you can be successful is through a four-year brick-and-ivy degree. That’s one way you can be, it’s not the only way, and we’re going to fix that problem in the United States of America.

Eliana Johnsons (49:41):

Mr. Ramaswamy, you’ve praised cryptocurrency, like Bitcoin, as an opt-out from our “broken financial architecture” and you oppose efforts to regulate it. The head of the largest international crypto exchange just pleaded guilty to allowing his platform to launder money for terrorists, including Hamas. You say your cryptocurrency plan will, “Ensure economic freedom for Americans.” Won’t it also ensure economic freedom for fraudsters, criminals, and terrorists?

Vivek Ramaswamy (50:12):

Look, fraudsters, criminals and terrorists have been defrauding people for a long time. Our regulations need to catch up with the current moment. The fact that SBF was able to do what he did at FTX shows that whatever they have as the current framework isn’t working, and I think it is nothing short of embarrassing that Gary Gensler, the current leader of the SEC, in front of Congress could not even say whether Ethereum counted as a regulated security or not. And so, I think that this is just another example of the administrative state gone too far. Here’s the dirty little secret in American politics today, the people who we elect to run the government are not the ones who are even actually [inaudible 00:50:52] that are writing regulations that Congress never gave them the authority to write.

(50:59)
And the good news is a US president can absolutely fix that. That takes a US president with a spine. So, what I’ve said is in my administration, by the end of year one, we will have a 75% reduction in the number of federal bureaucrats. We will shut down government agencies that should not exist. We will rescind any regulation that fails the test of West Virginia v. EPA, which is the most important Supreme Court case of our lifetime that said, “If Congress didn’t delegate that to an administrative agency, then it’s unconstitutional.” These are seismic changes. These are big changes that the next president can deliver without asking Congress for permission or for forgiveness.

(51:41)
And I want people to understand that distinction because people have been sold myths by politicians for a long time saying, “I’m going to work with Congress to do this or that.” Much of what you’ve heard on the stage from the other politicians fit that description, they need Congress. The things that I’m promising you, this is what the leader of the executive branch gets to do under Article II of the Constitution-

Eliana Johnsons (52:00):

Thank you, sir.

Vivek Ramaswamy (52:01):

… Cut down the bureaucracy [inaudible 00:52:03]-

Eliana Johnsons (52:02):

Thank you, sir.

Vivek Ramaswamy (52:03):

… Grow our economy and put the Federal Reserve in its place as part of the crypto discussion-

Eliana Johnsons (52:06):

No, no, no, Mr. Ramaswamy-

Vivek Ramaswamy (52:06):

90% headcount reduction at the Fed.

Eliana Johnsons (52:09):

… You’re out of time. 15 seconds, Governor DeSantis.

Ron DeSantis (52:11):

So, one of the dangers that we’re going to face, Biden wants, is a central bank digital currency. They want to get rid of cash. Crypto, they want to force you to do that. They’ll take away your privacy. They will absolutely regulate your purchases. On day one as president, we take the idea of central bank digital currency and we throw it in the trash can. It’ll be dead on arrival when I’m the president of the United States.

Vivek Ramaswamy (52:32):

I agree with that-

Megyn Kelly (52:34):

We got to go to break. We got to go to break. We have a whole second hour to get to, it’s exciting. And when we come back, we got a big subject, huge you might even say, Donald Trump. Stay tuned.

Speaker 7 (52:55):

RNC Youth Advisory Council.

Speaker 8 (52:56):

We have put together a youth advisory board. We partnered with Young America’s Foundation for the first debate. We’re going to have influencers at these debates. We’re going to give them access to our candidates and we’re going to get our information out there. Real

Speaker 9 (53:08):

Policies with real ideas, with real meat on the bones is what earns young people’s support.

Speaker 10 (53:13):

We have to wake up. We have to start involving my generation and focusing on winning over the youth vote. This is an incredible opportunity to get my generation a seat at the table.

Ronna McDaniel (53:25):

The RNC is laser-focused on beating Joe Biden and far-left Democrats next November.

Elise Stefanik (53:30):

Bank Your Vote is a campaign to encourage, educate, and activate Republican voters on when, where, and how to lock in their votes as early as possible in their state.

Kevin McCarthy (53:40):

We don’t need to wait until the last quarter to put points on the board.

Brian Mast (53:44):

It’s convenient, it’s secure. It makes sure that your voice is heard.

Madison Gesiotto Gilbert (53:48):

Join the team that beats Biden in 2024 by taking the pledge to vote early at bankyourvote.com.

Speaker 3 (53:54):

If you’re not careful where you put your savings, the government can essentially rob you in plain sight. Former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan warned us when he said, “Deficit spending is simply a scheme for the confiscation of wealth.” He’s right, deficit spending can cause inflation, which eats away at your savings even if you don’t see it at first. Is there a solution? Yes, Greenspan thought so when he said, “Gold stands in the way of this insidious process.” This is where Birch Gold Group comes in. You see, Greenspan understood that true wealth preservation can come from physical assets like gold. We’ve helped Americans diversify their IRA or 401(k) into gold for over 20 years. To get a free info kit from Birch Gold, text NOW to 989898 now. This is our gift to you. There’s no obligation and nothing to buy, just free info to help you. You diversify your hard-earned savings. Text NOW to 989898 right now.

Speaker 4 (54:54):

The wellness company and their doctors are medical professionals you can trust. And their new medical emergency kits are the gold standard when it comes to keeping you safe and healthy. This medical emergency kit contains an assortment of life-saving medications, including Ivermectin, Z-Pak. Rest assured, knowing that you have emergency antibiotics, antivirals, and antiparasitics on hand to help you and your family stay safe from whatever life throws at you next.

Kevin Sorbo (55:26):

Do you owe over $10,000 in back taxes? Kevin Sorbo here with an important message. The Biden administration has proposed an $80 billion plan to boost IRS collections. This means they could garnish your wages, levy your bank account, and even seize your property. Tax Network USA, a trusted tax firm can help protect your income and assets today while quickly settling your tax debt, but you have to act now while you still have options. Call Tax Network USA today.

Speaker 4 (56:25):

The wellness company and their doctors are medical professionals you can trust. And their new medical emergency kits are the gold standard when it comes to keeping you safe and healthy. This medical emergency kit contains an assortment of life-saving medications, including Ivermectin, Z-Pak. Rest assured, knowing that you have emergency antibiotics, antivirals, and antiparasitics on hand to help you and your family stay safe from whatever life throws at you next.

Megyn Kelly (57:18):

Welcome back, everyone. So, you’ve all spent a lot of time criticizing each other on this stage, as Governor Christie pointed out, and less so for most of you on the front-runner in this race, Donald Trump. We invited him to come tonight, as you know, but he declined to come, but we’d like to ask you a couple questions about him now. Ambassador Haley, former President Trump recently promised if he’s reelected to bring back and expand his program restricting immigration from Muslim countries. Here he is in Iowa on October 16th.

Donald Trump (57:50):

No longer will we allow dangerous lunatics, haters, bigots, and maniacs to get residency in our country. We’re not going to let them stay here. If you empathize with radical Islamic, terrorists and extremists, you’re disqualified. You’re just disqualified.

Megyn Kelly (58:06):

Ambassador Haley, do you support President Trump’s plan for ideological screening?

Nikki Haley (58:11):

Well, I don’t think that you have a straight-up Muslim ban, as much as you look at the countries that have terrorist activity that want to hurt Americans. You can ban those people from those countries, that’s the way we should look at it is which countries are a threat to us. You look at what came across the southern border, what worries me the most are those that came from Iran, from Yemen, from Lebanon, those areas where they say death to America. That’s where you want to be careful.

(58:35)
It’s not about a religion, it’s about a fact that certain countries are dangerous and are threats to us. A president has one job, and that’s to keep Americans safe. And that’s what we’ve got to do is make sure that we have good national security in that process, and that’s the way you should look at it, is where the terrorist threats are, how we’re going to deal with it and what we’re doing about it. And the biggest threat we have right now is communist China, but you have to also look at what Iran and Russia are doing as well, and we need to be paying attention to that. That’s why we have to focus on things like cyber, on space, on artificial intelligence, and not just the regular things that we’ve always focused on.

Ron DeSantis (59:11):

It’s not just terrorism though, that’s important, but look what’s happened in Europe. You have more anti-Semitism in Germany than at any time since Adolf Hitler. Why? Because they imported mass numbers of people who reject their culture. Europe is committing suicide with the mass migration and it’s illegal and legal. Nikki Haley said the other day there should be no limits on legal immigration and that corporate CEOs should set the policy on that.

Nikki Haley (59:40):

That’s not true. You’re lying.

Ron DeSantis (59:41):

There needs to be limits on immigration and we should not be importing people from cultures that are hostile. So for example, I said with Gaza, you had some of the squad wanted to import 300,000 people from the Gaza Strip. I said, “No, we’re not taking anyone from Gaza because of the anti-Semitism and because they reject

Ron DeSantis (01:00:00):

… affect American culture, so we’ve got to get smart about this. We cannot let the United States be like Europe.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:00:06):

Governor Christie. Governor Christie. Governor Christie.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:00:07):

If I may just hit this point because it relates to what they just said. There are things that the government can do right now that nobody’s talking about amongst the professional politicians in this race. What about all of the illegals who are already here? Here’s the answer. There’s 287G in the law. That is a provision that already allows ICE agents to deputize or allow local law enforcement to enforce those ICE [inaudible 01:00:34]. It shocks me that nobody in the Republican Party’s talking about it because there are one million then officials, law enforcement officials in this country, and against that backdrop, we absolutely have the ability to deport anybody who’s in this country illegally. We need to be talking about it more in this country.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:00:47):

Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Ramaswamy. Thank you. Governor Christie.

Nikki Haley (01:00:50):

I actually did that as governor of South Carolina.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:00:53):

Governor Christie, asked last night in Iowa whether he would be a dictator if he wins a second term in office, Donald Trump quipped, no, “Except for day one”, promising to seal the southern border. He has also pledged to begin the largest deportation operation in American history saying that migrants are “Poisoning the blood of our country.” He has pledged to round up and expel an estimated 11 million undocumented immigrants in the United States. What do you make of that plan?

Chris Christie (01:01:24):

I think it’s completely predictable. I mean, look, he’s made it very clear. There’s no mystery to what he wants to do. He started off his campaign by saying, “I am your retribution.” Eight years ago he said, “I’m your voice.” This is an angry, bitter man who now wants to be back as president because he wants to exact retribution on anyone who has disagreed with him, anyone who has tried to hold him to account for his own conduct, and every one of these policies that he’s talking about are about pursuing a plan of retribution. Yet at the first debate, my three colleagues on this stage, when asked if he would be convicted of federal felonies, would they still support him, raised their hand, looked into the camera and let everybody know that they would still support him, even if convicted of felonies. Federal felonies, by the way.

(01:02:21)
Federal felonies which involve our election process, federal felonies which involve the most sensitive of our governmental secrets, federal felonies where he instructed others to commit crimes, folks who are now agreeing to go to jail because of what they did in his name. Do I think he was kidding when he said he was a dictator? All you have to do is look at the history and that’s why failing to speak out against him, making excuses for him, pretending that somehow he’s a victim empowers him. You want to know why those poll numbers are where they are? Because folks like these three guys on the stage make it seem like his conduct is acceptable. Let me make it clear. His conduct is unacceptable. He’s unfit and be careful of what you’re going to get if you ever got another Donald Trump term. He’s letting you know “I am your retribution. Elizabeth, he will only be his own retribution. He doesn’t care for the American people. It’s Donald Trump first.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:03:20):

Thank you, Governor Christie. Governor DeSantis. Governor DeSantis. Thank you. Thank you. Governor DeSantis. Donald Trump would be older on day one of his second presidency than Joe Biden was on day one of his first. You have said Trump is not the same man he was when he ran in 2016. Your campaign is running ads showing Trump confused and you have said he has “Lost the zip on his fastball.” You seem to be saying Donald Trump is no longer mentally fit to be president. Is that what you think?

Ron DeSantis (01:03:53):

Look, he is … Father Time is undefeated. The idea that we’re going to put someone up there that’s almost 80 and there’s going to be no effects from that, we all know that that’s not true, and so we have an opportunity to do a next generation of leaders and really be able to move this country forward. We also need a president that can serve two terms. I don’t think Donald Trump … I don’t think he’d be able to get elected. The Democrats want him to be the nominee. We see that. They’re going to turn the screws the minute … if he got the nomination-

Elizabeth Vargas (01:04:19):

But do you think he’s mentally fit to be president?

Ron DeSantis (01:04:20):

I think we need to have somebody younger. I think when you get up to 80, I don’t think it’s a job for that, but let me just respond to some of the things there. Look, the media’s making a big deal about what he said about some of these comments. I would just remind people that is not how he governed. He didn’t even fire Dr. Fauci. He didn’t fire Christopher Ray. He didn’t clean up the swamp. He said he was going to drain it. He did not drain it. He said he was going to build the wall and have Mexico pay for it. We don’t have the wall. He did say in 2016 he’d have the largest deportation program in history. He deported less than Barack Obama did when Barack Obama was president.

(01:04:54)
Some of these policies he ran on in ’16, I was cheering him on then, but he didn’t deliver it. Here’s what I can promise people. A hundred percent of the things I promised as governor, I delivered on those promises. I beat the Left time and time again and that’s what I’ll do for you as president. We got to start winning again as a party. Yes, win the election, but we’ve got to start getting these issues. I will go in and wreak havoc on this bureaucracy. You will see people fired and we are going to bring a reckoning for how this government handled COVID-19 and the lockdown.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:05:23):

Listen, here’s what’s irritates the heck out of me. Now, Chris, you had your chance to wax eloquent on Donald Trump. You were doing it all this whole race.

Chris Christie (01:05:32):

Why doesn’t he just answer the question? The question was very direct. Is he fit to be president or isn’t he? The rest of the speech is interesting but completely nonresponsive and if we were in a courtroom, they’d strike the answer and say, “Governor DeSantis, you’re a smart man-”

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:05:48):

No, they wouldn’t. They would argue that-

Chris Christie (01:05:51):

No, they would.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:05:51):

No, they wouldn’t, Chris.

Chris Christie (01:05:52):

They would strike the answer because you’re not answering it. Is he fit-

Ron DeSantis (01:05:54):

You have your thing. You have your thing.

Chris Christie (01:05:58):

No, I don’t have my thing. He’s the thing. Is he fit or isn’t he?

Ron DeSantis (01:06:00):

We not want to do someone that’s almost 80.

Chris Christie (01:06:02):

You’re talking about him being 80 years old, Ron. Is he fit, Ron?

Ron DeSantis (01:06:04):

It doesn’t mean that somebody couldn’t be elected. That’s up to the people to decide.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:06:07):

Governor DeSantis. Governor DeSantis, let him finish.

Ron DeSantis (01:06:13):

I think we have an opportunity to choose somebody who is in the prime of their life.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:06:15):

Guys, no talking over each other.

Ron DeSantis (01:06:18):

We don’t have to worry about all this stuff with [inaudible 01:06:20] and we’ll do it.

Megyn Kelly (01:06:20):

Governor, please stop, I’m going to come to you. Finish.

Ron DeSantis (01:06:23):

Look, Father Time is undefeated. I don’t know how he would score on a test, but I know this. We have an opportunity to nominate someone and elect someone for two terms who’s going to be spitting nails on day one and for eight years deliver you big results.

Megyn Kelly (01:06:39):

So you do think he’s fit. You do think.

Ron DeSantis (01:06:39):

We should not nominate somebody-

Chris Christie (01:06:41):

He won’t answer

Ron DeSantis (01:06:42):

Who’s almost 80 years old.

Chris Christie (01:06:43):

He’s afraid to answer.

Ron DeSantis (01:06:45):

No, I’m not.

Chris Christie (01:06:47):

No, you have to … either you are afraid or you’re not listening.

Ron DeSantis (01:06:50):

No, it’s not.

Chris Christie (01:06:50):

There’s a simple question.

Ron DeSantis (01:06:50):

You don’t want to hear the answer. [inaudible 01:06:52].

Megyn Kelly (01:06:51):

Nobody can hear this. No one can hear you, they can’t hear you. You finish and then you get it back.

Chris Christie (01:07:00):

Look, I’m a simple guy. I hear the question and I answer it. Is he fit or isn’t he? I’ll concede. You are fit, Ron. You are a new generation. You’re 44 years old. I wish I was still 44 years old.

Ron DeSantis (01:07:16):

I’m 45.

Chris Christie (01:07:18):

Well, congratulations. I’d still take 45. Is he fit or isn’t he? This is the problem with my three colleagues. They’re afraid to offend. Let me tell you something. If you’re afraid-

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:07:31):

See, I want to say-

Elizabeth Vargas (01:07:31):

Hold on, Mr. Ramaswamy.

Chris Christie (01:07:32):

If you’re afraid to offend Donald Trump, then what are you going to do when you sit across from President Xi, you sit across from the Ayatollah, you sit across from Putin? You have to be willing to offend with the truth and answer the question. [inaudible 01:07:49]

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:07:48):

It’s not about offending.

Megyn Kelly (01:07:51):

I promised Ron DeSantis a minute and not a full minute. You’ve been waiting and then we’re moving on.

Ron DeSantis (01:07:56):

It’s not about offending. It’s about pointing out do you want to elect somebody who will be older than Biden was when he went in 2021? I don’t think he’s as bad as Biden was at all, but I do think that over a four-year period, it is not a job for somebody that’s pushing 80. We need somebody that’s younger. We need somebody that’s going to be able to go in there and clean house on day one and do it for two terms.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:08:19):

Here’s my issue with all three of my other colleagues on this debate stage is all three of them have been licking Donald Trump’s boots for years for money and endorsements. Ron DeSantis, you’ve been a great governor, but you would’ve never been one without actually begging Donald Trump for that endorsement.

Ron DeSantis (01:08:35):

You attacked him in your book a year ago.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:08:36):

Same thing with Chris Christie as a lobbyist begging them for COVID money for his special interests in New Jersey, prepping him for the debates last time around. These people are now Monday morning quarterbacking some decision he made. I think the real enemy is not Donald Trump, it’s not even Joe Biden. It is the deep state that at least Donald Trump attempted to take on. If you want somebody who’s going to speak truth to power, then vote for somebody who’s going to speak the truth to you.

(01:09:02)
Why am I the only person on the stage at least who can say that January 6th now does look like it was an inside job, that the government lied to us for 20 years about Saudi Arabia’s involvement in 9/11, that the great replacement theory is not some grand right-wing conspiracy theory, but a basic statement of the Democratic Party’s platform, that the 2020 election was indeed stolen by big tech, that the 2016 election, the one that Trump won for sure, was also one that was stolen from him by the National Security Establishment that actually put out the Trump Russia collusion hoax that they knew was false?

(01:09:39)
There’s a reason why I’m the only person on this stage who can say these things. That’s what it’s going to take, not people who were licking his boots one time and now Monday morning quarterbacking and criticizing when it’s convenient.

Megyn Kelly (01:09:49):

Governor Christie, you do not favor a ban on trans medical treatments for minors, saying it’s a parental rights issue. The surgeries done on minors involve cutting off body parts at a time when these kids cannot even legally smoke a cigarette. Kids who go from puberty blockers to cross-sex hormones are at a much greater likelihood of winding up sterile. How is it that you think a parent should be able to okay these surgeries, nevermind the sterilization of a child and aren’t you way too out of step on this issue to be the Republican nominee?

Chris Christie (01:10:25):

No, I’m not because Republicans believe in less government, not more, in less involvement with government, not more in government involvement in people’s lives. You know what, Megan? I trust parents and we are out there saying that we should empower parents in education, we should empower parents to make more decisions about where their kids go to school. I agree. We should empower parents to be teaching the values that they believe in in their homes without the government telling them what those values should be. Yet we want to take other parental rights away. I’m sorry. As a father of four, I believe there is no one who loves my children more than me. There’s no one who loves my children more than my wife. There’s no one who cares more about their success and health in life than we do.

(01:11:14)
Not some government bureaucrat, not some … You look at these jokers down in Congress, it takes them three weeks to pick a speaker and up until two days ago, they couldn’t promote somebody in the military in the United States Senate who earned their new rank, and we’re going to put my children’s health and my decisions in their hands for them to make those decisions, for Joe Biden to make those decisions for me and for my wife? Let me just say this. This is not something I favor. I think it’s a very, very dangerous thing to do, but that’s my opinion as a parent, Megan, and I get to make the decisions about my children, not anybody else. Every parent out there who’s watching tonight, you start to turn over just a little bit of this authority, the authority they’re going to take from you next, you’re not going to like. I’ll stand up for parents each and every time.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:12:05):

There are laws banning smoking and drinking by a [inaudible 01:12:10]

Ron DeSantis (01:12:08):

You do not have [inaudible 01:12:11].

Megyn Kelly (01:12:12):

Hold on, hold on. Let me tell you something. I have a follow-up question for him and you guys are going to get to weigh in. Okay? Here’s my follow-up question. You talk about parental rights, let’s talk about them. When you were governor in 2017, you signed a law that required new guidelines for schools dealing with transgender students. Those guidelines required schools to accept a child’s preferred gender identity even if the minor’s parents objected.

Chris Christie (01:12:33):

Not true.

Megyn Kelly (01:12:33):

It said that there is no duty for schools to notify parents if their son or daughter changes their gender identity, allowing this serious issue to remain a secret between the school and a child. How is any of that pro-parental rights?

Chris Christie (01:12:47):

By the way, that’s simply not true.

Ron DeSantis (01:12:48):

You’re doing what you accused me of, Chris.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:12:49):

It is absolutely true.

Chris Christie (01:12:50):

That’s simply not true. That’s simply not true. That law was put into effect in 2018 and regulated in 2018 after I was out of office, Megan.

Megyn Kelly (01:12:59):

You mandated the guidelines.

Chris Christie (01:13:00):

No. No, we did not, Megan. We did not issue those guidelines and you’re wrong about that. Simply wrong. I have stood up each and every time.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:13:08):

I think if this is one issue that’s disqualifying, it’s this one.

Chris Christie (01:13:12):

I stood up every single time for parents to be able to make the decisions for their minor children. Every single time parents should make those decisions. By the way, you know what? Every once in a while parents are going to make decisions that we disagree with, but the minute you start to take those rights away from parents, you don’t know that’s slippery slope, what rights are going to be taken away next and what’s going to be imposed on you.

Ron DeSantis (01:13:38):

As a parent, you do not have the right to abuse your kids. This is cutting off their genitals. This is mutilating. These minors, these are irreversible procedures and this is something that other countries in Europe like Sweden, once they started doing it, they saw it did incalculable damage. They’ve shut it down. I signed legislation in Florida banning the mutilation of minors because it is wrong. We cannot allow this to happen in this country. I know Chris disagrees with me and I think he has an honest position. Nikki disagrees with me. She opposes the bill that we did to ban that. She said the law shouldn’t get involved with it.

Nikki Haley (01:14:13):

I did not.

Ron DeSantis (01:14:13):

You said the law shouldn’t get involved with it. She also, though, I think, and this flows from what she did as governor of South Carolina, they had a bill to try to say that men shouldn’t go into girls’ bathrooms and she killed that bill and she bragged that she killed that bill. Even to this day she bragged that. I don’t think men should be going into little girls’ bathrooms. I think it’s wrong and I think we have every right to protect them from that.

Megyn Kelly (01:14:36):

I am going to come to you. I promise him seconds. Go quickly.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:14:40):

I think the north star here is transgenderism is a mental health disorder. We don’t let you smoke a cigarette by the age of 18. We don’t let you have an addictive drink of alcohol by the age of 21. I just challenged Ron DeSantis to go one step further and support what I think is clearly within the authority to do using federal funds just like Reagan did in ’84 for the Highway Act that said the minimum drinking age needs to be 21. We can do the same thing when it comes to banning genital mutilation or chemical castration. I know Ron’s been unclear about on the federal level. I’m crystal clear. That’s where I stand. That’s a mental health disorder. That’s where we need to be at.

Megyn Kelly (01:15:16):

Got it. That’s it. Go ahead.

Nikki Haley (01:15:20):

First of all, Ron has continued to lie because he’s losing.

Ron DeSantis (01:15:23):

No, it’s not a lie.

Nikki Haley (01:15:24):

You are lying.

Ron DeSantis (01:15:25):

You said it on tape.

Nikki Haley (01:15:27):

First of all, I will say that when I was governor, 10 years ago when the bathroom situation came up, we had maybe a handful of kids that were dealing with an issue and I said we don’t need to bring government into this, but boys go into boys’ bathrooms, girls go into girls’ bathrooms and if anyone else has an issue, they use a private bathroom. Now 10 years later we see that this issue has exploded and this shows how hypocritical Ron continues to be. When he was running for governor and they asked him about that, he said he didn’t think bathroom bills were a good use of his time. You can go look that up.

Ron DeSantis (01:16:07):

I signed a bathroom bill in Florida, so that’s obviously not true.

Nikki Haley (01:16:15):

The idea that you would say that I was against it-

Ron DeSantis (01:16:18):

I signed it, you didn’t. You killed it. I signed it. I stood up for little girls. You didn’t do it and there was this going on. I was actually just in South Carolina. Some of the legislators told me at the time there were boys going into the girls. That’s the whole reason why they did it.

Nikki Haley (01:16:31):

No, no, no, no, no.

Ron DeSantis (01:16:31):

So they say when she does that explanation, that that doesn’t hold water and this is the upstate of South Carolina.

Nikki Haley (01:16:35):

Ron.

Ron DeSantis (01:16:36):

I signed the bill, I protected the girls.

Nikki Haley (01:16:37):

Do you know South Carolinians?

Ron DeSantis (01:16:37):

She did not do it. I know that.

Nikki Haley (01:16:38):

Do you know South Carolinians? Because South Carolinians … No, no, no. You are not going to talk about my state like that because I will tell you for a fact, South Carolinians never allowed that to happen and we did not have that issue at the time. What I have always said is boys go into a boys’ bathroom, girls go into a girls bathroom. But hold on one second. I also say that biological boys shouldn’t be playing in girls’ sports and I will do everything I can to stop that because it’s the women’s issue of our time.

Ron DeSantis (01:17:08):

I signed legislation to protect women’s sports. I actually get this stuff done.

Eliana Johnsons (01:17:11):

We’re going to move on from this.

Megyn Kelly (01:17:11):

You got it.

Eliana Johnsons (01:17:14):

Thank you, guys. We’re going to move on. Mr. Ramaswamy, when discussing your Hindu faith in September you seemed to take a shot at Ambassador Haley who is also Indian American and who converted to Christianity as an adult. You said “An easy thing for me to do being a politician is to shorten my name, profess to be a Christian and then run. Make Vivek Vicky or whatever.” Are you questioning Nikki Haley’s Christian convictions, and why is your campaign made a point of referring to Ambassador Haley by her given first name Nimarata, even though she’s gone by Nikki for her whole life?

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:17:49):

Well, my whole deal is if Nikki Haley of all people should know how to pronounce my name correctly, the rest of the news media can learn it. My deal is I’ll call her Nikki when she can say my own name right and that’s our little fun side bet there. Here’s what I will say is deeper. I don’t question her faith, but I question her authenticity and I think that’s deeper here. We were just talking about the trans issue. This is a symptom of a deeper cancer in American life, identity politics, this new religion that says your race, your gender, and your sexuality are your identity. It is anti-American, it is meritocratic, it’s anti-meritocratic and it is dividing this country to a breaking point. I’ve spoken about this to the Left. My books are all about this. I’ve preached this to the Left, but it’s even worse when republicans try to play the same game.

(01:18:31)
We’re talking about that trans issue and Nikki Haley’s campaign launch video sounded like a woke Dylan Mulvaney Bud Light ad talking about how she would kick in heels. At the first debate, she said that only a woman can get this job done. That’s what she said. After the third debate, when I criticized Ronna McDaniel after five failed years of leadership of this party and criticized Nikki for her corrupt foreign dealings as a military contractor, she said that I have a woman problem. Nikki, I don’t have a woman problem. You have a corruption problem and I think that that’s what people need to know. Nikki is corrupt. This is a woman who will send your kids to die so she can buy a bigger house. This is the problem, using identity politics more effectively than Kamala Harris is a form of intellectual fraud and it actually needs to … and there’s her donor puppet masters wielding their puppet right up here tonight.

(01:19:24)
This is how this game is played. The puppet masters put up their puppet and I reject the use of identity politics in this party. It has been a cancer coming from the Left and I’m sick and tired of the double standards, the people of this country are too, having two X chromosomes does not immunize you from criticism.

Eliana Johnsons (01:19:38):

Thank you, sir. Thank you. Governor Haley, would you like to respond?

Nikki Haley (01:19:42):

No, it’s not worth my time to respond to him.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:19:45):

You have been using identity politics at every step. She knows it’s true and that’s why she’s [inaudible 01:19:52].

Nikki Haley (01:19:51):

Sir, we’re not going to give you a response to the question that was to you.

Megyn Kelly (01:19:54):

Okay, we got to move on to this. Now by arrangement with the Republican National Committee, we’ve got two questions for you about the Justice Department and our election system. Here’s Tom Fitton with Judicial Watch. Governor Christie, this one’s for you.

Tom Fitton (01:20:12):

President Trump and many of his supporters claim federal law enforcement agencies have abused his civil rights for the last eight years by, among other things, spying on him and now prosecuting him while having treated Hillary Clinton and Joe Biden with kid gloves. A recent Gallup poll shows that Americans think more highly of the U.S. Postal Service than they do the FBI or Justice Department. What would you do as president to restore the faith of the American people in these agencies?

Chris Christie (01:20:44):

Well, first off, I’m the only person on this stage who’s actually done a job in the Department of Justice. I was the U.S. Attorney in New Jersey in the fifth-largest office in this country appointed by President Bush on September 10th, 2001. It was an extraordinary time in this country to be on the front lines of fighting the greatest attack against our country since Pearl Harbor. I’m proud of the seven years I spent in the Justice Department and one of the reasons I am is because I had an attorney general when I came in named John Ashcroft and John Ashcroft stood up and told each and every one of us our job was to do one thing, to make sure justice was done every day regardless of partisanship, regardless of gender or race or any other consideration. That’s what we did for seven years and at a time when our country was at its greatest moment of danger in the last 40 years, we did exactly that and there was not another domestic terrorist attack on this soil.

(01:21:44)
What I would do as president having had that experience and the only one who’s had that experience is to pick an attorney general who will absolutely do the same thing that John Ashcroft did, to pick U.S. attorneys who will only care about making sure that justice is done without regard to any other consideration but the facts that are presented and whether someone is guilty beyond a reasonable doubt and the government can prove it. We have had attorneys general like Eric Holder and Loretta Lynch and Jeff Sessions and now our current attorney general who have not met that standard. And the only way you restore people’s faith in the justice system is to put someone like that in charge of the Justice Department and then as president to get at the hell out of the way on anything that involves criminal investigations. If a president’s involved in trying to do something and put their thumb on the scales, Donald Trump says he will do, that makes people much less likely to believe our justice system can be fair.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:22:48):

Thank you.

Megyn Kelly (01:22:49):

Thank you. Governor DeSantis, this next one is for you. Back to Tom Fitton.

Tom Fitton (01:22:52):

Many Republicans are concerned about the legitimacy of elections. A federal judge just ruled that Pennsylvania must count on dated mail-in ballots and unlike Alabama, many states still don’t require any identification to vote. What should states do now to increase election integrity and voter confidence for the 2024 election?

Ron DeSantis (01:23:14):

Well, Tom, thanks for the question. Thanks for what you guys do at Judicial Watch. It’s really, really important. There’s a lot of corruption in this government. You guys are doing a great job. What you should do for election integrity is do what we did in Florida. 20 years ago, Florida and elections was a joke. Everybody would laugh at it. I came in, I removed a couple supervisors from South Florida. We require voter ID universal, no Zuckerbucks, no mass mail balloting and no ballot harvesting. We even have an agency that prosecutes people for violating election laws. The result of that in both 2020 and 2022, we counted millions and millions of votes on election night, produced the results, it was transparent and everybody was happy. That is not happening throughout this country.

(01:23:58)
But let me tell you this, as the nominee, I think it’s important. Not every state’s where we need it to be there is ballot harvesting in places like Nevada, all these places. I am not going to fight with one hand tied behind my back. I’m going to have organizations in all the swing states. If they’re harvesting, we are harvesting. If they’re Zuckerbucks, we’re Zuckerbucks. We are going to exploit whatever the rules are. I favor changing the rules to be like Florida and some of the other states that have done a good job, but until then we have to do that.

(01:24:23)
Then just on the Justice Department and FBI, I mean, I remember being in Iraq working with FBI on the ground and then I was a special assistant. I used to have such a high regard for these agencies. What they did to Donald Trump with the Russia collusion was one of the biggest abuses of power in the history of our country. These agencies need to be cleaned out. With me, you’ll have a new FBI director on day one. We’re going to clear out the DOJ, the IRS, all these places. Buckle your seatbelts, there’s going to be a new sheriff in town.

Megyn Kelly (01:24:55):

Thank you. All right, we got to do a quick break. We’re going to come back in one minute. China up next.

Speaker 2 (01:25:12):

Santa’s coming soon. Have you finished your Christmas shopping? Get 15% off your entire purchase at the official GOP store when you text Santa to 80810. But hurry, order by December 8th to get your presence under the tree in time. Who do you think will win the debate? Text your answer to 80810.

Speaker 3 (01:25:45):

If you’re not careful where you put your savings, the government can essentially rob you in plain sight. Former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan warned us when he said “Deficit spending is simply a scheme for the confiscation of wealth.” He’s right. Deficit spending can cause inflation, which eats away at your savings even if you don’t see it at first. Is there a solution? Yes. Greenspan thought so when he said “Gold stands in the way of this insidious process.” This is where Birch Gold Group comes in. You see, Greenspan understood that true wealth preservation can come from physical assets like gold. We’ve helped Americans diversify their IRA or 401(k) into gold for over 20 years. To get a free info kit from Birch Gold, text Now to 989898 now. This is our gift to you. There’s no obligation and nothing to buy. Just free info to help you diversify your hard-earned savings. Text Now to 989898 right now.

Speaker 4 (01:26:45):

The Wellness company and their doctors are medical professionals you can trust and their new medical emergency kits are the gold standard when it comes to keeping you safe and healthy. This medical emergency kit contains an assortment of life-saving medications, including Ivermectin, Z-Pak. Rest assured, knowing that you have emergency antibiotics, antivirals, and anti-parasitics on hand to help you and your family stay safe from whatever life throws at you next.

Kevin Sorbo (01:27:16):

Do you owe over $10,000 in back taxes? Kevin Sorbo here with an important message. The Biden administration has proposed an $80 billion plan to boost IRS collections. This means they could garnish your wages, levy your bank account, and even seize your property. Tax Network USA, a trusted tax firm, can help protect your income and assets today while quickly settling your tax debt. But you have to act now while you still have options. Call Tax Network USA today.

Speaker 5 (01:27:45):

I have not taken a penny from any foreign source ever in my life. My son has not made money in terms of this thing about, what are you talking about, China.

Speaker 6 (01:28:15):

Meet Rumble. Rumble was founded on the principle of unfiltered access to diverse ideas. Rumble offers a chance to discover America’s independent voices free from algorithms and sensors. Participate in bold discussions and help protect a free and open internet. Rumble, bold and free. Visit rumble.com and download the app today.

Kevin Sorbo (01:28:44):

Do you owe over $10,000 in back taxes? Kevin Sorbo here with an important message. The Biden administration has proposed an $80 billion plan to boost IRS collections. This means they could garnish your wages, levy your bank account, and even seize your property. Tax Network USA, a trusted tax firm can help protect your income and assets today while quickly settling your tax debt. But you have to act now while you still have options. Call Tax Network USA today.

Eliana Johnsons (01:29:30):

Welcome back to the final GOP Presidential Primary Debate of 2023. We’re going to talk about our college campuses, starting with you, Ambassador Haley. House Republicans yesterday hauled Elite University presidents up to Capitol Hill to answer for the displays of antisemitism on college campuses. These leaders, including the president of Harvard, were asked

Eliana Johnsons (01:30:00):

… asked whether calling for the genocide of the Jews would violate school policies against harassment and intimidation. All of them said it would depend on the context, including whether that speech veers into conduct. How do you think these schools and the rest of society should balance the imperative of free speech against the need to prevent radical activists from harassing and intimidating others?

Nikki Haley (01:30:24):

It was disgusting to see what happened. If this had been the KKK that was doing protests on those campuses, every one of those college presidents would’ve been up in arms. This is just as bad. The idea that they would go and allow that kind of pro-Hamas protest or agree with the genocide of Jews and try and say that they needed context on that, there is no context to that.

(01:30:48)
This is what we need to do to deal with it. First of all, we have got to get foreign money out of our universities. You’ve got Arab money, you’ve got Chinese money, you’ve got others. We need to go to every university and say, “You either take foreign money or you take American money, but the days of taking both are over.”

(01:31:03)
The second thing we need to do is we need… Biden made a mistake not including anti-Zionism in the definition of anti-Semitism. If you don’t think that Israel has a right to exist, that is anti-Semitic. We will change the definition so that every government, every school has to acknowledge the definition for what it is.

(01:31:24)
The third thing is we really do need to ban TikTok once and for all, and let me tell you why. For every 30 minutes that someone watches TikTok, every day, they become 17% more anti-Semitic, more pro-Hamas based on doing that. We now know that 50% of adults, 18 to 25, think that Hamas was warranted in what they did with Israel. That’s a problem. When campuses also don’t go and protect, when they have these rallies, and you’ve got students that are scared, we need to go to these universities and say, “If you’re not going to protect these students, if you’re not going to acknowledge anti-Semitism, we’ll take your tax-exempt status away.” That’ll fix it and that’ll take care of it for them.

Eliana Johnsons (01:32:09):

Staying with you, ambassador Haley, on October 6th, the Israeli government thought it had a clear-eyed view of the threat from Hamas. In fact, according to the New York Times, it even had Hamas’ attack plan and dismissed it as an aspiration. The Israelis were wrong. In our country, the FBI director told the Senate panel just yesterday that he sees, “Blinking red lights everywhere,” and that the threat level has, “Gone to a whole nother level since October 7th.” Which of the threats facing our country do you worry could blindside us?

Nikki Haley (01:32:44):

What worries me and what keeps me up at night is what happens between now and election day while Joe Biden’s in office. That’s what worries me more than anything else, but I’ll tell you that America right now is acting like it’s September 10th. We better remember what September 12th felt like because it only takes one. And whether you’re looking at open borders that are allowing people to come in, Iran knows the easiest way to get to America is through the southern border, and we’re not doing anything to stop it.

(01:33:13)
We’ve got to get the foreign infiltration out of our country, whether it’s in our schools, whether it’s on our social media, whether it’s we need to stop all foreign lobbying that’s happening to members of Congress, and we need to start America again. Until we do that, we are going to be at threats. We’ve got to look at, Iran, China and Russia want to destroy the West. We have to start acting strong again. We’ve got to start protecting Americans. Right now, Americans don’t feel protected, and we’re not doing anything to strengthen it. So, Joe Biden continues to be a problem, that’ll change on election day.

Megyn Kelly (01:33:46):

Governor DeSantis, if China invades Taiwan, would you send American troops, as President Biden’s has said he would do?

Ron DeSantis (01:33:55):

We will be able to deter that from happening. I think that’s the important thing, we need a strategy of denial so that we’re deterring Xi’s ambitions.

Megyn Kelly (01:34:03):

What if it doesn’t work?

Ron DeSantis (01:34:04):

It’s going to work. Taiwan’s an ally. We have longstanding American policy, and you know how that’s done, and we will follow that.

(01:34:13)
But here’s the thing, Taiwan is important, not just because of semiconductors. It’s important because if China’s able to break out of this first island chain, they’re going to be able to dominate commerce in the entire Indo-Pacific. They will use that to export authoritarianism all around the world, including here in the United States.

(01:34:30)
You look at some of these guys, actually, some of them that are supporting Nikki on Wall Street, they grovel to China. Anytime something happens, they got to go do that. So, they already exert a huge amount of authority over this country. It will get a lot worse. So, deterring China’s ambitions is the number one national security task that I will do as president and we will succeed. The 21st century needs to be an American century. We cannot let it be a Chinese century.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:34:56):

Mr. Ramaswamy, I’m coming to you next.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:34:58):

I’ll be clear on the same issue, if I may.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:35:00):

Okay, I’m coming to you next on Taiwan. You said, if you want to stop Xi from invading Taiwan, “Let’s open a branch of the NRA in Taiwan and put an AR-15 in the hands of every family and train them how to use it. That will-”

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:35:12):

I stand by it.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:35:13):

“… give Xi a taste of American exceptionalism.” The national police in Taiwan announced a zero gun policy last year. Is this a serious policy proposal? And if it isn’t, why do you keep repeating it?

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:35:28):

Well, it’s part of a broader deterrence strategy, and so, I think I’m going to respectfully disagree with Ron here. I think the next U.S. president needs to be crystal clear that at least for the foreseeable future, the U.S. will absolutely defend Taiwan, and it is with that clarity that we actually achieve deterrence.

(01:35:43)
But I have a broader strategy than that. We need to get onside in our relationship with India, take it to the next level. India has to be able to block the Andaman Sea, which is where China gets most of its Middle Eastern oil supplies. That’s critical.

(01:35:55)
I also do believe the Second Amendment is a critical way of preventing foreign autocrats from being able to, “It’s worked in America, why wouldn’t it work in Taiwan?” So, it is part of a broader strategy, but I do think that we need to be specific about our deterrence strategy or else Xi Jinping is just encroaching by the day.

(01:36:11)
And the reason why we’re not doing it for China, I want to be crystal clear, is because we’re scared. Why are we scared? Because we depend on them for our modern way of life. Why do we depend on them for our modern way of life? It’s because Nikki Haley’s latest friends like Larry Fink have created co-mingled economies with BlackRock, Tellan, Exxon and Chevron. They can’t drill here while being a shareholder of PetroChina, not applying those same constraints in China. So, it is our economic dependence on China that makes us scared. If that were a Russian spy balloon, we’d have shot it down in an instant. If that were a Russian spy base in Cuba, we’d be actually going hard on them instead of turning the other way as we are with China. So, it comes back down to that economic dependence. We cannot depend on them for our pharmaceuticals, our semiconductors, and people have been lied to for a long time. Our own military, the F-35 jets that we make in this country-

Elizabeth Vargas (01:37:01):

Thank you.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:37:02):

… depend on China and it’s going to take an outsider to fix that broken establishment.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:37:05):

Thank you, Mr. Ramaswamy. Ambassador Haley, would you like to respond?

Nikki Haley (01:37:10):

I mean, when it comes to China and Taiwan, the one way that we keep China from going into Taiwan is, one, make sure that we win in Ukraine, that we protect our friends, but also let China know that there’ll be hell to pay if they go into Taiwan. They need to know that there is going to be a force that’s going to go against them and they need to know it’s not just going to be the United States. That is why we need to build our partnerships with India, with South Korea, with Japan, with the Philippines, with Australia. We need to start pulling that alliance together. And the first way we do that is we need to make sure that on day one we look at the fact, whatever…

(01:37:46)
If China pulled the rug out from under us tomorrow, would we be ready? Think about what happened during.

(01:37:51)
COVID. Everybody told you to wear a mask, they were made in China. Everybody told you to take a COVID test, they were made in China. I mean, everything that happened, if you go to the drugstore, all those medicines are made in China. We have to make sure that we are not relying on China for anything related to our national security, which means let’s start focusing on doing deals with our friends now.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:38:14):

Thank you, Ambassador. Governor Christie, I’d like you to weigh in on that. And do you think arming every family in Taiwan with an AR-15 is a plausible policy.

Chris Christie (01:38:23):

I don’t think we have constitutional authority over Taiwan, to give them a Second Amendment. I think they can only do that for themselves.

(01:38:32)
But look, I want to be really clear. Once again, I want to play the role of actually answering your question, which is if China went after Taiwan, you’re absolutely right, I would, as president, have us go militarily and defend them.

(01:38:47)
Secondly, I’m not afraid based upon those economic relationships to do that because these economic relationships mean nothing. Nothing. If what’s going to happen is that China is going to come and act in that region of the world however they see fit. It’s not right.

(01:39:02)
And I’ll say this about what I heard from Nikki earlier. She said that Donald Trump was good on trade. He wasn’t. And the proof that he wasn’t good on trade with China is that all he did was impose tariffs, which raised the prices for every American. You want to know what has contributed to inflation in this country? Yes, it’s more government spending. Yes, it’s the fact that we’re printing too much money. Absolutely. But it is also the increase in prices that were driven by Donald Trump’s tariffs.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:39:33):

Thank you.

Chris Christie (01:39:33):

And one last thing, you can’t say he was good on trade because he didn’t trade. He didn’t change one Chinese policy in the process. He failed on it.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:39:43):

Thank you, Governor Christie. Governor DeSantis, switching subjects here. For 15 years, Republicans have been burned by politicians’ promises to repeal Obamacare. Trump repeatedly promised to replace it with, “Something terrific,” but failed to propose anything. You’re now promising something better, but Florida has more uninsured people than almost any other state. Why should Americans trust you more than any other Republicans who’ve disappointed them on this issue?

Ron DeSantis (01:40:13):

Well, I think we have millions of Americans who do not have access to affordable healthcare, and it’s not just getting some type of card and Medicaid, because a lot of times they don’t even get access to doctors. Do you actually get access to care?

(01:40:27)
The other thing is we have millions and millions of people that don’t have access to good doctors and good hospitals.

(01:40:32)
Florida did not expand Obamacare. I think the states that did that I think are struggling financially.

(01:40:38)
So that, yes, we declined to do that and I don’t think that that was the right policy to do, but we are going to go after the cost. You’re paying too much for everything. We’ve actually addressed this in Florida in some ways, but you need price transparency. You need to hold the pharmaceuticals accountable. You need to hold big insurance and big government accountable, and we’re going to get that done. I think it’s very, very important economically. I think it’s very, very important for the country that we get that done.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:41:02):

Go ahead.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:41:03):

Yeah, so I actually wanted it. This is a very personal issue to our family. I wanted to take actually a minute to recognize my wife who’s here today, badass surgeon. She did a bunch of cases with cancer survivors earlier today, flew here to be here tonight. We’ll be back at 7:00 AM in Columbus, Ohio tomorrow, taking care of those patients in the OR, and on the front lines of people who have actually not swallowed for years.

(01:41:27)
And here’s something that’s awful that’s happening in our healthcare system. They’ll pay for anything, like feeding tubes, doctors to be pill pushers, but for the procedures that can actually make these patients better, we have a broken healthcare system that doesn’t pay for it.

(01:41:41)
My wife, [inaudible 01:41:42] in many cases, does not get paid for those procedures. She does them anyway because it’s the right thing to do, but that does not work system-wide.

(01:41:50)
So, here’s the answer. We don’t have a healthcare system in this country. We have a sick care system. We need to start having diverse insurance options in a competitive marketplace that cover actual health, preventative medicine, diet, exercise, lifestyle and otherwise. And here’s how we deliver that, end the antitrust exemptions for health insurance companies. That’s where the competitive marketplace begins. That’s crony capitalism, and that’s the answer.

Megyn Kelly (01:42:17):

Next question’s for you. Okay, through Operation Warp Speed, the Trump administration and private industry developed a COVID vaccine in record time.

Speaker 11 (01:45:42):

Who do you think will win the debate? Text your answer to 80810. Text “pin” to 80810 to get your exclusive golden elephant pin. The golden elephant pin shows that you are a top supporter of the GOP, but there are only 25 left in stock. Hurry, text the number on your screen now to get yours before they sell out for good.

Speaker 3 (01:46:37):

If you’re not careful where you put your savings, the government can essentially rob you in plain sight.

(01:46:44)
Former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan warned us when he said, “Deficit spending is simply a scheme for the confiscation of wealth.” He’s right, deficit spending can cause inflation, which eats away at your savings even if you don’t see it at first.

(01:46:58)
Is there a solution? Yes. Greenspan thought so when he said, “Gold stands in the way of this insidious process.” This is where Birch Gold Group comes in. You see, Greenspan understood that true wealth preservation can come from physical assets like gold. We’ve helped Americans diversify their IRA or 401(k) into gold for over 20 years.

(01:47:20)
To get a free info kit from Birch Gold, text “now” to 989898 now. This is our gift to you. There’s no obligation and nothing to buy, just free info to help you diversify your hard-earned savings. Text “now” to 989898 right now.

Speaker 4 (01:47:37):

The Wellness Company and their doctors are medical professionals you can trust, and their new medical emergency kits are the gold standard when it comes to keeping you safe and healthy.

(01:47:45)
This medical emergency kit contains an assortment of life-saving medications, including Ivermectin, Z-Pak. Rest assured, knowing that you have emergency antibiotics, antivirals, and antiparasitics on hand to help you and your family stay safe from whatever life throws at you next.

Kevin Sorbo (01:48:09):

Do you owe over $10,000 in back taxes? Kevin Sorbo here with an important message. The Biden administration has proposed an $80 billion plan to boost IRS collections. This means they could garnish your wages, levy your bank account, and even seize your property. Tax Network USA, a trusted tax firm, can help protect your income and assets today while quickly settling your tax debt. But you have to act now while you still have options. Call Tax Network USA today.

Speaker 3 (01:48:55):

Did you know the government can essentially rob you in plain sight? Former Fed Chair Alan Greenspan warned, “Deficit spending is simply a scheme for the confiscation of wealth,” but he added, “Gold stands in the way of this insidious process. Birch Gold Group has helped thousands of Americans diversify their IRA or 401(k) into gold. To get a free info kit from Birch Gold, text “now” to 989898. Again, text “now” to 989898 right now.

Eliana Johnsons (01:50:11):

Tuscaloosa, Alabama, final question before closing statements, and we want to get you all in, so we’re going to give you 45 seconds for this last one. Governor Christie, we’re going to start with you. Which former president would you draw inspiration from for your own presidency and why?

Chris Christie (01:50:30):

I would draw inspiration from Ronald Reagan. In the last year, I’ve spent a lot of time writing a book about President Reagan that’s going to be called What Would Reagan Do? That book’s going to come out early in 2024. And what I learned more than anything else was that Ronald Reagan was a slave to the truth. Ronald Reagan stood up for the truth, whether it was popular or unpopular at the moment. In 1964, he stood up against the John Birch Society when it was very unpopular to the party to do it, but he would not put up with our party standing for lies and deceit, even if it gave him political progress. That’s the kind of president that I will be, and I would draw that inspiration from the 40th President of the United States, Ronald Reagan.

Eliana Johnsons (01:51:14):

Ambassador Haley?

Nikki Haley (01:51:16):

Well, I have to say too, I think George Washington, when you look at the responsibilities he had, of how do you go and take on this great American experiment and make sure that the people are protected, and they always knew that government was intended to secure the rights and freedoms of the people, it was never meant to be all things to all people. And then, you look at Abraham Lincoln and you look at the challenges and you look at the division that happened in our country and the ability to lead in spite of the loud noises and say what will bring out the best in people to get us to go forward is always something that’s important. And I think we need that now more than ever.

Eliana Johnsons (01:51:51):

Governor DeSantis?

Ron DeSantis (01:51:56):

Reagan, Washington, Lincoln, excellent. One of the guys I’ll take inspiration from is Calvin Coolidge. Now, people don’t talk about him a lot. He’s one of the few presidents that got almost everything right. He understood the proper role of the federal government under the Constitution. We need to restore the U.S. Constitution as the centerpiece of our national life. And that requires a president who understands the original understanding of the Constitution, who has a good sense of the Bill of Rights, and who knows how we’ve gone off track with this massive fourth branch of government, this administrative state which is imposing its will on us and is being weaponized against us. So, silent Cal knew the proper role of the federal government. The country was in great shape when he was President of the United States, and we can learn an awful lot from Calvin Coolidge.

Eliana Johnsons (01:52:44):

Over to you, Mr. Ramaswamy, to conclude our history lesson.

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:52:48):

Sure. Well, I will say Ron picked a president who was born on July 4th. I’ll pick one who died on July 4th. It’s Thomas Jefferson. He was 33 years old when he wrote the Declaration of Independence. And you all are sitting on a swivel chair today, he invented the swivel chair while he was at it, while writing that Declaration of Independence. That’s that founding spirit that we miss, that we’re the pioneers, we’re the explorers, the guy who sent them out on the Lewis and Clark expeditions.

(01:53:14)
And I think a lot about what would Thomas Jefferson say to today’s Republican Party, and I think one thing he’d remind us of, we haven’t talked about as much tonight, but I think it is one of the interesting ideological discussions we’re having in our party, is freedom of speech. You get to express your mind freely no matter how heinous the opinion. Thomas Jefferson understood that. He’s an inspiration for me.

Eliana Johnsons (01:53:33):

Thank you, sir.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:53:33):

Thank you, Mr. Ramaswamy. And believe it or not, it’s time for closing statements. Governor Christie, would you like to begin?

Chris Christie (01:53:41):

Sure. Thank you. I want you all to kind of picture in your mind’s election day, you will all be heading to the polls to vote, and that’s something that Donald Trump will not be able to do because he will be convicted of felonies before then and his right to vote will be taken away.

(01:53:59)
Look, here’s the bottom line. You can boo about it all you like and continue to deny reality. But if we deny reality as a party, we’re going to have four more years of Joe Biden. When my colleagues here raised their hands and said they would support him even if he was a convicted felon, the bigger problem with it is they were confirming the lies he’s told to the American people. If you’re too timid to take on Trump, believe me, others will see that timidity; Xi, Putin, and the Ayatollah, the border crossers on the southern border, and the criminals in our streets. They’ll sense that timidity and they’ll take advantage of that failure or leadership.

(01:54:36)
We need to get back to an old American idea, that every person is responsible for their own conduct, even a president. I’ll be the kind of president who has the humility that knows that you work for the people. It’s not the other way around. I will earn your trust. I want to earn your vote.

Eliana Johnsons (01:54:57):

Thank you, Governor Christie. Mr. Ramaswamy?

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:55:00):

I’ll use this to just address a topic we didn’t talk about tonight, but I think is one of the most important topics that needs to be discussed. That is this climate change agenda that is shackling this country like a set of handcuffs. I said it the first debate and I stand by it, the climate change agenda is a hoax, because it has nothing to do with the climate. That’s what we have to see. 98% reduction in the climate disaster related deaths in the last century. Eight times as many people are going to die of cold temperatures this year than warm ones, yet against that backdrop, there’s an issue coming up in Iowa. It’s core to Iowa farmers.

(01:55:33)
I met Kim Junker, Kathy Stockdale and other farmers who are about to have a carbon capture pipeline built across their land using eminent domain to do it. That’s unconstitutional and it’s wrong. And if you thought COVID was bad, what’s coming with this climate agenda is far worse. We should not be bending the knee to this new religion. That is what it is. It is a substitute for a modern religion. We are flogging ourselves and losing our modern way of life, bowing to this new God of climate. And that will end on my watch.

Megyn Kelly (01:56:04):

Thank you. Ambassador Haley?

Vivek Ramaswamy (01:56:05):

It’s the most critical issue that’s coming up. Thank you.

Nikki Haley (01:56:10):

Thank you very much. Our country is in chaos. We see it on the southern border. We see it on our streets, in our cities, we see it on college campuses. We feel it with our economy, with inflation and with debt. And we feel it around the world with wars in Europe and within the Middle East. We have to stop the chaos, but you can’t defeat Democrat chaos with Republican chaos. And that’s what Donald Trump gives us.

(01:56:38)
My approach is different. No drama, no vendettas, no whining. I envision an America where we’re protected from illegal immigration and Chinese infiltration. I envision an America where we unleash our economy and we reject socialism. But more importantly, I envision an America where we rediscover our national purpose and our pride.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:57:04):

Thank you.

Nikki Haley (01:57:05):

I crushed Joe Biden in the polls-

Elizabeth Vargas (01:57:06):

Thank you.

Nikki Haley (01:57:07):

And if you give me this chance, we will crush him in November and take our country back.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:57:11):

Thank you, Governor.

Nikki Haley (01:57:11):

Go to nikkihaley.com.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:57:11):

Thank you, Ambassador Haley.

(01:57:15)
Governor DeSantis?

Ron DeSantis (01:57:23):

We are in jeopardy of being the first generation of Americans to leave to our kids and grandkids an America less prosperous and less free than the one we inherited. I refuse to sit idly by and let that happen, but we got to have people that are going to be willing to fight the people that are doing this to us. You can’t be these establishment Republicans that just cave at the first sign of opposition. I’ll fight for you.

(01:57:45)
We also need to win again as a party. Yes, win the election, which we’ve struggled to do, but also win on these big issues. And nobody has defeated these people more than what I have done in the state of Florida. On issue after issue, we have won and we have won big. And that’s what we’ll do for you. We also need leadership. Leadership is not about doing what’s easy. It’s about being willing to set out that vision,

Eliana Johnsons (01:58:07):

Thank you.

Ron DeSantis (01:58:07):

… knowing they’re going to shoot arrows at you, they’re going to come at you.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:58:09):

Thank you.

Ron DeSantis (01:58:10):

I will fight the good fight. I will keep the faith that I will finish race.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:58:14):

Thank you. Thank you, Governor.

Ron DeSantis (01:58:14):

Thank you and God bless you.

Elizabeth Vargas (01:58:14):

Thank you all of you.

Megyn Kelly (01:58:14):

Thanks to all of you. Thanks for watching.

Eliana Johnsons (01:58:14):

Thank you guys.

Chris Christie (01:58:14):

Good job. See you soon.

Transcribe Your Own Content

Try Rev and save time transcribing, captioning, and subtitling.

PCMag Editors Choice
TrustPilot Reviews
Other Related Transcripts
Nicole Shanahan Speaks To Supporters After Being Announced As RFK Jr's Running Mate
RFK Jr. Unveils Running Mate in 2024 Presidential Bid
• 21 hours ago
Biden Speaking in Las Vegas
Biden Speaks at Campaign Event in Las Vegas
• 1 week ago
Tucker Carlson Responds to SOTU Address
Tucker Carlson Responds to State of the Union Address
• 2 weeks ago

Copyright Disclaimer

Under Title 17 U.S.C. Section 107, allowance is made for "fair use" for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and research. Fair use is permitted by copyright statute that might otherwise be infringing.

Trust pilot grey score card
PCMag Editors Choice
PC editor choice logo
Popular Transcription Resources
Audio Transcription
Transcribe Zoom Recordings & Meetings
Transcribe Video to Text
Transcribe a YouTube Video to Text
How to Convert MP3 to Text
Transcribe an Interview
Best Transcription Apps
Transcribe Podcasts to TextPodcast Transcription: Why Transcribe Your Podcast?
Best Audio Transcription Software
Transcribe MP4 Files to Text
Stay updated.
Get a weekly digest of the week’s most important transcripts in your inbox. It’s the news, without the news.


Transcription
How It Works
FAQ
Free Call Recorder
Voice Recorder App
Transcription App
Online Voice Recorder
Audio Trimmer & Cutter
Transcribe Audio to Text
Automated Transcription
Captions
How It Works
FAQ
Caption Converter
Subtitles
Foreign Subtitles
Enterprise
Security & Privacy
API
Speech to Text API
Integrations
About
Press
Careers
Freelancers
Blog
Resources
Affiliates
Influencers
Help
Transcript Library
Get in touch
1717 W 6th St.
Suite 310, Austin,
TX 78703
Contact Us
888-369-0701
support@rev.com
    
BECOME A FREELANCER
© Rev.com
Reviews | Terms | Privacy | CA Privacy | Sitemap
